# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-03-30
- Polynomial Rings (continued)
- Group rings
- Homomorphisms and kernels

Handout: Sample Second Midterm!! \
Midterm (April 6) will cover all sections up to and including Sect. 7.2.

For Friday, read Sect. 7.3, especially the examples on p. 243-247.

Is $\mathbb{Z}/6\mathbb{Z}$ an integral domain?\
*No*: $\bar{2} \cdot \bar{3} = \bar{0}$ so it has zero divisors.

## Polynomials
**Caution**: Don't think of polynomials as functions. For example, $(\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z})[x]$ is infinite, but there are only finitely many functions from $\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$ to $\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$ \
So, for example, let $p(x) = x^2 - x$. \
Then $p(\bar{0}) = \bar{0}^2 - \bar{0} = \bar{0}$ \
$p(\bar{1}) = \bar{1}^2 - \bar{1} = \bar{0}$ \
Although $p$ gives us the constant function 0 from $\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$ to itself, it is a nonzero element of $(\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z})[x]$

**Proposition**: Let $R$ be an entire ring (integral domain)

a. If $p$ and $q$ are nonzero elements of $R[x]$, then $\deg{pq} = \deg{p} + \deg{q}$ (and $pq \neq 0$).
b. $R[x]$ is entire; and
c. $(R[x])^{\times} = R^{\times}$ ($\text{units in}\ R[x] = \text{units in}\ R$)

**Proof**:

a. If $p$ and $q$ have leading terms $a_nx^n$ and $b_mx^m$, respectively then $pq$ has the leading term $a_mb_mx^{n + m}$ (since $a_nb_m \neq 0$).
b. $R[x]$ is commutative and has $1 \neq 0$ because $R$ is. Also, it has no zero divisors by (a).
c. By (a), if $uv = 1$ then $\deg{u} + \deg{v} = 0$, so $u$ and $v$ are constants, $\therefore$ $u, v \in R^{\times}$. And conversely.

## Group Rings
Let $R$ be a commutative ring with $1$ and let $G$ be a finite group (not necessarily abelian). \
Write $G = \{g_1, g_2, \ldots, g_n\}$, with $g_1 = 1$.
Then the *group ring* $R[G]$ or $RG$ is the set of all formal sums: $a_1g_1 + a_2g_2 + \ldots + a_ng_n$ with $a_1, \ldots, a_n \in R$ with addition defined component wise: \
$\sum\limits_{i = 1}^n a_ig_i + \sum\limits_{i = 1}^n b_ig_i = \sum\limits_{i = 1}^n (a_i + b_i)g_i$ \
and multiplication defined so that $(a_ig_i)(b_jg_j) = (a_ib_j)(g_ig_j)$. This is a ring. \
For ease of notation we write $a1 = g_1$ as $a\ \forall a \in R$ and $1g$ (with $1 \in R$) as $g\ \forall g \in G$ (So $1 \in RG$ means $1_R \cdot 1_G$, with $1_R \in R$ and $1_G \in G$. This is the identity element in $RG$.)

**Examples**:

1. If $R$ is the zero ring, then $R[G]$ is the zero ring.
2. If $G$ is the trivial group, then $R[G]$ is just $R$.
3. $\mathbb{Q}[\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}]$ is $\{a + bx : a, b \in \mathbb{Q}\}$ (here $x = \bar{1}$) with $(a + bx)(c + dx) = (ac + bd) + (ad + bc)x$ because $(bx)(dx) = (bd)x^2 = bd$ ($x^2 = 1 \in \mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$: $\bar{0} + \bar{0} = \bar{0}$, $\bar{1} + \bar{1} = \bar{0}$.

**Comments**:

1. $R = 0$ or $G$ is abelian $\iff$ $R[G]$ is commutative
2. If $G \neq 1$ and $R \neq 0$, then $R[G]$ always has zero divisors. Let $g \in G$, $g \neq 1$, and let $n = |g|$. Then $(1 - g)(1 + g + g^2 + \ldots + g^{n - 1}) = 1 - g^n = 0$.

## Ring Homomorphisms
**Definiition**:

a. Let $R$ and $S$ be rings. Then a (ring) homomorphism from $R$ to $S$ is a function $\phi : R \to S$ that preserves addition and multiplication: \
$\phi(a + b) = \phi(a) + \phi(b)$ ($\implies$ $\phi$ is a homomorphism from the additive group of $R$ to the additive group of $S$. and $\phi(ab) = \phi(a)\phi(b)\ \forall a, b \in R$
b. The kernel of a (ring) homomorphism $\phi : R \to S$ is $\ker{\phi} = \{r \in R : \phi(r) = 0 \} = \text{kernel of $\phi$ as a homomorphism of additive groups}$.
c. An *isomorphism* from a ring $R$ to a ring $S$ is a bijective (ring) homomorphism from $R$ to $S$.

**Note**: If $R$ and $S$ both have $1$, we (still) don't assume that a homomorphism $\phi : R \to S$ has $\phi(1) = 1$. \
*For example*: If $R_1$ and $R_2$ are rings, then the direct product $R_1 \times R_2$ is defined to be the cartesian product $R_1 \times R_2$ (as a set or additive group) with componentwise adddition and multiplication ($(a_1, a_2)(b_1, b_2) = (a_1b_1, a_2b_2)$). If $R_1$ and $R_2$ have 1, then so does $R_1 \times R_2$ (it's $(1, 1)$). Define $\phi : R_1 \to R_1 \times R_2$ by $\phi(r) = (r, 0)$. This is a ring homomorphism, but $\phi(1) \neq (1, 1)$.

**More examples of ring homomorphisms**:

1. For all $m \in \mathbb{Z}_{> 0}$, $\phi : \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z}$ defined by $\phi(n) = \bar{n}$, is a ring homomorphism.
2. $\phi : \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z}$ defined by $\phi(n) = 2n$ is *not* a ring homorphism ($\phi(1 \cdot 1) = \phi(1) = 2 \neq \phi(1) \cdot \phi(1) = 2 \cdot 2 = 4$).
3. $\phi : \mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z}$ given by $\phi(a, b) = (b, a)$ is a nonidentity ring automorphism (isomorphism from a ring to itself).
4. If $R$ is a commutative ring with 1 and $c \in R$ then "evaluation at $c$" is a homomorphism from $R[x]$ to $R$ ($p(x) \mapsto p(c)$)

**Proposition**: Let $\phi : R \to S$ be a ring homomorphism

a. If $R'$ is a subring of $R$ then $\phi(R')$ is a subring of $S$.
b. If $S'$ is a subring of $S$ then $\phi^{-1}(S')$ is a subring of $R$.

**Proof**: Exercise.

Since $\{0\}$ is a subring of $S$, we get: \
**Corollary**: The kernel of a ring homomorphism $\phi : R \to S$ is a subring of $R$.

**Next question**: Which subgrings of a ring can be kernels of homomorphisms? \
*Hint*: In $S$, we have $0 \times s = s \times 0\ \forall s \in S$. So this gives an additional property of $\ker{\phi}$.
