---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{stmaryrd}
    - \usepackage{tikz}
    - \usepackage{nth}
---

# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-03-04
- Isomorphism theorems
- Even & odd permutations

## Homework due 3/11
- 3.3: 1, 3, 7, 8
- 3.5: 5, 12
- 4.1: 2, 4
- 4.2: 2, 8, 11

**Theorem** (Second Isomorphism Theorem): \
Let $A$ and $B$ be subgroups of a group $G$, and assume that $A \le N_G(B)$ (e.g. $B \trianglelefteq G$) Then $AB \le G$, $B \trianglelefteq AB$, $A \cap B \trianglelefteq A$ and $AB/B \cong A/(A \cap B)$ (via $aB \mapsfrom a(A \cap B)$)
**Proof** (continued): \
We already showed $AB \le G$ and $B \trianglelefteq AB$. \
Define a homomorphism $\phi : A \to AB/B$ by $\phi(a) = aB$. This is onto, because if $x \in AB/B$ then $x = (ab)B$ with $a \in A$ and $b \in B$. Then $x = a(bB) = aB = \phi(a)$. \
The kernel of $\phi$ is $\ker{\phi} = \{a \in A : aB = B\} = \{a \in A : a \in B\} = A \cap B$. \
Then, by the First Isomorphism Theorem, $A \cap B \trianglelefteq A$ and $A \cap B \cong AB/B$.
\begin{tikzpicture}
  \node (00) at (0,1) {$AB$};
  \node (10)  at (-0.5,0) {$A$};
  \node (11)  at (0.5,0) {$B$};
  \node (20)  at (0,-1) {$A \cap B$};
  \draw
    (00) -- (10) -- (20)
    (00) -- (11) -- (20);
\end{tikzpicture}

**Theorem** (Third Isomorphism Theorem):
Let $H$ and $K$ be normal subgroups of a group $G$, and assume that $H \le K$. Then $K/H \trianglelefteq G/H$ and $(G/H)/(K/H) \cong (G/K)$ via $(gh)(K/H) \mapsto gK$). \
**Proof**: Define $\phi : G/H \to G/K$ by $\phi(gH) = gK$ Need to check that $\phi$ is well defined. It is well defined and onto for the same reasons as in Ex. 3.2.11
We have $gH \in \ker{\phi} \iff gK = K \iff g \in K$, so $\ker{\phi} = K/H$. \
Then, by the $\nth{1}$ Isomorphism Theorem: \
$(G/H)/(K/H) \cong G/K$.

**Theorem** (Fourth Isomorphism Theorem, "lattice"): \
Let $N \trianglelefteq G$. Then, for subgroups of $A$ of $G$ containing $N$, $A/N$ is a subgroup of $G/N$. Call it $\bar{A}$. Then $A \mapsto \bar{A}$ is a bijection from $\{\text{subgroups of $G$ containing $N$}\}$ to $\{\text{subgroup of $G/N$\}$, and its inverse is $H \mapsto \pi^{-1}(H)$, where $\pi : G \to G/N$ is the natural projection.

Moreover, this bijection satisfies:

1. $A \le B \iff \bar{A} \le \bar{B}$ for all subgroups $A, B$ of $G$ containing $N$ (it preserves inclusion).
2. $|B : A| = |\bar{B} : \bar{A}|$ for all $A, B$ as above with $A \le B$ (it preserves index).
3. $\overline{\langle A, B \rangle} = \langle \bar{A}, \bar{B} \rangle$ (it preserves join)
4. $\overline{A \cap B} = \bar{A} \cap \bar{B}$ for all $A, B$ (it preserves intersection).
5. $A \trianglelefteq B \iff \bar{A} \trianglelefteq \bar{B}$ for all $A, B$ as above (it preserves normality).
6. $A$ is conjugate to $B$ in $C$ $\iff$ $\bar{A}$ is conjugate to $\bar{B}$ in $\bar{C}$ for all subgroups $A, B, C$ of $G$ containing $N$ such that $A \le C$ and $B \le C$ (it preserves conjugacy).

(Partial) **Proof**: $A/N \le G/N$ because $A/N = \pi(A)$ (proved earlier). \
If $H \le G/N$ then $\pi^{-1}(H) \le G$ (also proved earlier) and $\pi^{-1}(H) \supseteq N$ because if $n \in N$ then $\pi(n) = nN = N$ which is the identity element of $G/N$, so it's in $H$. \
If we map $A$ ($A \le G$ and $A \supseteq N$) to $\bar{A}$ and back to a subgroup of $G$, we get $\pi^{-1}(A/N)$. To show $\pi^{-1}(A/N) = A$: if $a \in A$ then $aN subseteq A/N$, so $\pi(a) \in A/N$, $\therefore$ $a \in \pi^{-1}(A/N)$. Thus $A \subseteq \pi^{-1}(A/N)$. To show that $\pi^{-1}(A/N) \le A$ if $b \in \pi^{-1}(A/N)$ then $\pi(b) = bN$ lies in $A/N$ so $bN = aN$ for some $a \in A$. $\therefore$ $b \in aN$, so $b = an$ for some $n \in N$. Then $b \in A$ since $n \in N \subseteq A$, and $a \in A$. $\therefore$ $\pi^{-1}(A/N) \subseteq A$. So they're equal. \
Also we need to show: if $H \le G/N$ then $\pi^{-1}(H) = H$. Let $x \in G/N$. Then $x = gN$ for some $g \in G$. $x \in \pi^{-1}(H)/N \implies gN = hN$ with $h \in \pi^{-1}(H)$, so $hN = \pi(h) \in H \implies x \in H$. $\therefore$ $\pi^{-1}(H)/N \subseteq H$. \
$x \in H \implies \pi(g) = gN = x \in H \implies g \in \pi^{-1}(H) \therefore x = gN \in \pi^{-1}(H)/N$. This shows $H \subseteq \pi^{-1}(H)/N$ $\therefore$ $H = \pi^{-1}(H)/N = \overline{\pi^{-1}(H)}$. \
Proofs of (1) - (6) are left as an exercise.

**Example**: Let $G = D_{16} = D_{2n}$ with $n = 8$ $= \langle r, s | r^8 = s^2 = 1, rs = sr^{-1} \rangle$. \
Let $N = \langle r^4 \rangle$. This is the center of $G$ (Ex 1.2.4 or 2.2.7). We have $N \trianglelefteq G$. This is because the center of a group is always a normal subgroup. $gNg^{-1} = \{gng^{-1} : n \in N\} = \{ngg^{-1} : n \in N\} = \{n : n \in N\} = N$. \
Then $G/N = \langle r, s | r^8 = s^2 = 1, rs = sr^{-1}, r^{4} = 1 \rangle = \langle r, s | r^4 = s^2 = 1, rs = sr^{-1} \rangle = D_8$. \
The lattice of subgroups of $D_8$ is on p. 69: \
\begin{tikzpicture}
  \node (00) at (0,0) {$D_8$};
  \node (10) at (-1,-1) {$\langle s, r^2 \rangle$};
  \node (11) at (0,-1) {$\langle r \rangle$};
  \node (12) at (1,-1) {$\langle rs, r^2 \rangle$};
  \node (20) at (-2,-2) {$\langle s \rangle$};
  \node (21) at (-1,-2) {$\langle r^2s \rangle$};
  \node (22) at (0,-2) {$\langle r^2 \rangle$};
  \node (23) at (1,-2) {$\langle rs \rangle$};
  \node (24) at (2,-2) {$\langle r^3s \rangle$};
  \node (30) at (0,-3) {$1$};
  \draw
    (00) -- (10) -- (20) -- (30)
    (00) -- (11) -- (22) -- (30)
    (00) -- (12) -- (24) -- (30)
    (10) -- (21) -- (30)
    (12) -- (23) -- (30)
    (10) -- (22)
    (12) -- (22);
\end{tikzpicture}
and the lattice for $D_{16} = G$ is on p. 70 \
All of the subgroups $\supseteq \langle r^4 \rangle$ form a lattice that's identical to the subgroup lattice of $D_8$.

**Next**: we will prove:
**Theorem**: Let $n \ge 2$. Then there is a unique homomorphism $S_n \to \{\pm 1\}$ such that $\epsilon((i\ j)) = -1\ \forall 1 \le i < j \le n$. *But* we'll do it differently from the book (expect handout on Mon.).
