# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-04-20
- Unique factorization domains

For Friday: \
Skip "Factorization in the Gaussian Integers" (p. 289-292)
Read Sect. 9.1 and 9.2

**Last time**: In a P.I.D., every nonzero prime ideal is a maximal ideal. \
**Corollary**: If $F$ is a field, then $F[x, y]$ ($= F[x][y]$) is not a P.I.D. \
**Proof**: Since $F[x, y]/(y) \cong F[x]$, and $F[x]$ is an integral domain, but not a field, the ideal $(y)$ is prime but not maximal. $\therefore$ $F[x, y]$ is not a P.I.D. because P.I.D.'s don't have such ideals.

## Unique Factorization Domains
**Definition**: Let $R$ be an integral domain. Then:

a. An element $r \in R$ is *irreducible* if it's nonzero, not a unit, and $r = ab \implies a$ or $b$ is a unit.
a'. An element $r \in R$ is *reducible* if it's nonzero, not a unit, and $r = ab$ with $a, b$ not units.
b. An element $p \in R$ is prime if the ideal $(p)$ is a nonzero prime ideal; equivalently, if $p$ is nonzero, $p$ is not a unit, and $p \mid ab \implies p \mid a$ or $p \mid b$.

**Examples**:
0. In a field, there are no irreducible, reducible, or prime elements. Everything's either a unit or 0.
1. In $\mathbb{Z}$, the prime elements are $\pm p$, where $p$ is a prime number (as in grade school: $2, 3, 5, 7, \ldots$). \
   The reducible elements are $\pm$ composite numbers \
   The irreducible elements are $\pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 5, \ldots$
2. The book gives some examples of irreducible elements that are not prime.

**Proposition**: In an integral domain, all prime elements are irreducible. \
**Proof**: Let $R$ be an integral domain and let $p \in R$ be prime. Then $p \neq 0$ and $p$ is not a unit. Suppose $p = ab$. Then $a \in (p)$ or $b \in (p)$ (by primeness of $(p)$). If $a \in (p)$, then $p \mid a$, but also $a \mid p$, so $a$ and $p$ are associates; since $a \neq 0$, $b = \frac{p}{a}$ is a unit. Similarly, $b \in (p) \implies (a)$ is a unit. $\therefore$ $p$ is irreducible. \
The converse is true in a P.I.D. (proof later).

**Remark**: Let $R$ be an integral domain, and let $a$ and $b$ be associates in $R$. Then: \
$a = 0 \iff b = 0$; \
$a$ is a unit $\iff$ $b$ is a unit \
$a$ is irreducible $\iff$ $b$ is irreducible \
$a$ is reducible $\iff$ $b$ is reducible \
$a$ is prime $\iff$ $b$ is prime $((a) = (b))$

**Definition**: A *unique factorization domain* is an integral domain $R$ for which every nonzero nonunit element $r \in R$ has the following properties:

i. $r$ can be written $r = p_1p_2 \cdots p_n$, in which all $p_i$ are irreducible elements of $R$; and
ii. Any two such factorizations are unique up to *associates*: if $r = q_1q_2 \cdots q_m$ also, then $m = n$ and after renumbering the $q_i$, each $q_i$ is associate to some $p_i$.

## Big Theorem of the Day
**Theorem**: Every P.I.D. is a U.F.D.

**Key Lemma**: Let $R$ be a P.I.D. Then every nonempty collection of ideals of $R$ has a maximal element (not necessarily a max ideal). \
**Proof**: Let $R$ be a P.I.D. and let $A$ be a nonempty collection of ideal of $R$. Partially order $A$ by inclusion. Let $B$ be a nonempty chain in $A$. We need to find an upper bound for $B$ in $A$: Let $J = \bigcup\limits_{I \in B} I$. As before, $J$ is an ideal of $R$. Clearly, $J$ is an upper bound for $B$. \
We need to check that $J \in A$. \
Since $R$ is a P.I.D., $J \in (r)$ for some $r \in R$. \
Since $J = \bigcup\limits_{I \in B} I$, $r$ occurs in some $I \in B$. \
So $J \subseteq I$ (because $J = (r)$ and $r \in I$), \
and $I \subseteq J$ (because $I$ is among the ideal whose union is $J$), $J = I \in B \subseteq A$, so $J \in A$. \
Therefore, by Zorn's lemma, $A$ has a maximal element.

**Theorem**: Every P.I.D. is a U.F.D. \
**Proof**: Let $R$ be a P.I.D. \
**Step 1**: Factorization. \
Assume that not every nonzero nonunit $r \in R$ can be written as a (finite) product of irreducibles. Let $A = \{(r) : r \in R, r \neq 0, \text{$r$ is not a unit, and $r$ is not equal to a (finite) product of irreducibles}\}$. Then (by assumption) $A \neq \emptyset$, so it has a maximal element $(r)$. Then $r \neq 0$, $r$ is not a unit, and $r$ is not a finite product of irreducibles. \
In particular, $r$ is not irreducible (otherwise $r = r$ would be a factorization). \
So $r$ is reducible, so $r = ab$ such that neither $a$ nor $b$ is a unit. \
Now $a \mid r$, so $(r) \subseteq (a)$. Also $b$ is not a unit, so $r$ and $a$ are not associates. $\therefore$ $(r) \neq (a)$. So $(a) \not\in A$ (by maximality of $(r)$). We know that $a \neq 0$ ($r \neq 0$), and $a$ is not a unit, so $(a) \not\in A \implies a = p_1p_2 \cdots p_n$ with $p_i$ irreducible $\forall i$. \
Similarly, $b = q_1q_2 \cdots q_m$ with $q_j$ irreducible $\forall j$. \
Then $r = ab = p_1p_2 \cdots p_nq_1q_2 \cdots q_m$ is a factorization of $r$ into irreducibles, contradiction. \
$\therefore$ every nonzero nonunit in $R$ can be factored into irreducibles. \
**Step 2**: Friday. \
See how Step 1 plays out if $R = \mathbb{Z}$. Just work with positive numbers, $n \ge 2$ (avoids units). Proof that every $n \ge 2$ has a prime factorization: \
**Method 1**: Strong induction: If all $m < n$ have prime factorizations, then:

a. if $n$ is prime, then $n = n$ is a prime factorization.
b. otherwise $n = ab$ with $a, b \ge 2$. Each of these has prime factorization, $\therefore$ so does $n$.

Conclude by induction.

**Method 2**: By contradiction: Let $n \ge 2$ be the smallest number not having a prime factorization. THen $n$ is not prime, so $n = ab$; $a, b < n$, so they have prime factorizations, $\therefore$ so does $n$, :(.
