# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-03-30
- Zorn's Lemma
- Rings of fractions

## Zorn's Lemma
**Version 1** (most convenient): Let $A$ be a nonempty partially ordered set in which every nonempty chain has an upper bound. Then $A$ has a maximal element. \
**Version 2**: Let $A$ be a partially ordered set in which every chain has an upper bound. Then $A$ has a maximal element. \
**Book's Version**: Let $A$ be a nonempty partially ordered set in which every chain has an upper bound. Then $A$ has a maximal element. \
These three versions are all equivalent: first sentences all describe the same condition on $A$. \
**Caution**: $B$ (the choice of chains) don't have to be countable. \
**Proposition**: Let $R$ be a ring with 1. Then every *proper* ideal is contained in some maximal ideal $\neq R$.

**Proof**: Let $R$ be a ring with 1 and let $I$ be a proper ideal of $R$. Let $A$ be the set of proper ideals of $R$ that contain $I$: $A \cdot \{\text{ideals} J : I \subseteq J \subsetneq R \}$. Then $A \neq \emptyset$ because it contains $I$. The set $A$ is partially ordered under inclusion. \
Let $B$ be a nonempty chain in $A$. \
Let $K = \bigcup\limits_{J \in B} J$ \
Then $K$ is an ideal in $R$: \
$B \neq \emptyset$, so $B \ni J$ and $J \subseteq K$, so $K \neq \emptyset$. \
Let $x, y in K$. Then there are elements $J_1, J_2 \in B$ such that $x \in J_1, y \in J_2$. Let $J$ be the larger of $J_1$ and $J_2$. Then $x \in J_1 \in J$ and $y \in J_2 \in J$, so $x - y \in J \subseteq K$. $\therefore$ $K$ is an additive subgroup of $R$. \
Now let $x \in K$ and $r \in R$. Then $x \in J$ for some $J \in B$, and $\therefore$ $xr \in J$ (since $J$ is an ideal), so $xr \in K$ (since $J \subseteq K$). $\therefore$ $K$ is an ideal of $R$. \
Also $K \supseteq I$ because $K \subseteq J \supseteq I$ for some $J \in B$. Clearly $K$ is an upper bound for $B$ in $A$. \
$K$ is an ideal $\supseteq I$, is it a *proper* ideal? Yes, because $1 \not\in K$ ($1 \not\in J \forall J \in A$).
$\therefore$ by Zorn's lemma, $A$ contains a maximal element, which is a maximal ideal of $R$ that contains $I$. \
Let $M$ be a max element of $A$. THen $M$ is an ideal of $R$ that contains $I$. Also $M \neq R$ (since $M \in A$), and it's maximal, because if it's not then $\exists$ an ideal $N$ such that $M \subsetneq N \subsetneq R$, but then $N \in A$ ($N \supseteq M \supseteq I$ and $N$ is a proper ideal), contradicting the maximality of $M$ in $A$.

**Corollary**: Let $R$ be a ring with 1. Then $R$ has a maximal ideal $\iff$ $R \neq 0$. \
**Proof**: $R = 0 \implies$ its only ideal is 0, which is not maximal. $R \neq 0 \implies I = 0$ is a proper ideal, so it's contained in some maximal ideal.

**Corollary**: Same for prime ideals. \
$R = 0 \implies$ no proper ideals, $\therefore$ no prime ideals. \
$R \neq 0 \implies$ it has a maximal ideal, which is prime.

## Rings of Fractions
Ex. 7.1.5(1): is the set $\{r \in \mathbb{Q} : \text{$r$ has odd denominator (when written in lowest terms)}\}$ a subring of $\mathbb{Q}$? Yes. \
We'd like to be able to make such subrings, if if we don't have something to play the role of $\mathbb{Q}$. \
(And we'd like to generalize to generalize the consturction of $\mathbb{Q}$). \
Given a ring $R$ we'd like to construct a ring $Q$, containing a ring isomorphic to) $R$ as a subring, such that certain nonzero elements of $R$ are invertible in $Q$. \
Which elements *can* we want to invert in $Q$? \
Don't want 0 to become a unit in $Q$. Likewise, if $a$ is a zero divisor in $R$, say $ab = 0$ with $b \neq 0$, then $\frac{1}{a} = \frac{b}{ab} = \frac{b}{0}$, which is bad. \
We want our set of possible denominators to be closed under multiplication. \
And, we want to construct $Q$ without using any known ring that contains $Q$. \

**Theorem**: Let $R$ be a commutative ring. Let $D$ be a nonempty subset of $R$ such that $0 \not\in D$, $D$ contains no zero divisors, and $D$ is closed under multiplication.

1. Let $F = R \times D$. Define a relation $\sim$ on $F$ by $(r, d) \sim (s, e)$ if $re = sd$. Then $\sim$ is an equivalence relation on $F$.
2. Let $Q$ be the set of equivalence classes of $\sim$ in $F$. Then $(r, d) + (s, e) = (re + sd, de)$ and $(r, d) \cdot (s, e) = (rs, de)$. Give well-defined binary operations on $A$ that give $Q$ the structure of a ring with 1. Moreover, the map $R \to Q$ given by $r \mapsto \overline{(rd, d)}$ (bar means equivalence class) is independent of $d \in D$, and is an injective ring homomorphism. \
**Proof**:

1. $\sim$ is an equivalence relation: \
reflexive, symmetric: obvious \
transitive: $(r, d) \sim (s, e)$ and $(s, e) \sim (t, f) \implies re = sd$ and $sf = te$ $\implies$ $ref = sdf = tde \implies rf = td \implies (r, d) \sim (t, f)$ \
Let $\overline{(r, d)}$ = the equivalence class of $(r, d)$. Think of this as $d^{-1}r = \frac{r}{d}$. \
**Claim**: $\sim$ is the smallest equivalence class for which $(r, d)$ is equivalent to $(re, de)\ \forall r \in R; d, e \in D$. \
**Proof**: Let $\approx$ be the latter equivalence class. \
$(r, d) \sim (s, e) \implies re = sd \implies (r, d) \approx (re, de) \approx (sd, de) \approx (s, e) \implies $(r, d) \approx (s, e)$. "$\sim$" $\subseteq$ "$\approx$" (as subsets fo $F \times F$). In the other direction, "$\approx$" $\subseteq$ "$\sim$" because $(r, d) \sim (re, de)$ so $\sim$ has the property and $\approx$ is the smallest with the property.
