---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{amsmath}
    - \usepackage{mathtools}
    - \DeclareMathOperator{\lcm}{lcm}
    - \DeclareMathOperator{\im}{im}
---
# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-03-30
- Quotient rings
- Isomorphism theorems

On the homework (extra problem): \
In general, $|x + y|$ *divides* $\lcm{|x|}{|y|}$ \
See Ex. 16 on p. 60

Continuing from last time: let $\phi : R \to S$ be a (ring) homomorphism, and let $I = \ker{\phi}$. Which subrings can be kernels? \
The kernel is an additive subgroup; also: \
If $a \in I$ and $r \in R$ then $ar \in I$ and $ra \in I$, because $\phi(ra) = \phi(r)\phi(a) = \phi{r} \cdot 0 = 0$, so $ra \in I$, likewise $ar \in I$.

**Definition**: Let $R$ be a ring, and let $I$ be a subring of $R$. Then \
a. $r + I = \{r + a : a \in I\}$ (same as the coset of additive groups)
b. $rI = \{ra : a \in I\}$ and $Ir = \{ar : a \in I\}$. These are *not* cosets.

**Definition**: An ideal in a ring $R$ is a subring $I$ of $R$ such that $rI \subseteq I$ and $Ir \subseteq I$ $\forall r \in R$. (These are also called *two-sided* ideals. If we leave out $Ir \subset I$ then it's called a left ideal; similarly for right ideals. See the book.) \
To check that $I \subseteq R$ is an ideal in $R$, you only need to check that it's an additive subgroup and $rI \subseteq I$ and $Ir \subseteq I$ $\forall r \in R$. \
So, every kernel of a homomorphism is an ideal. \

Is every ideal in $R$ the kernel of some homomorphism? \
**Proposition**: Let $R$ be a ring and let $I$ be an ideal in $R$. Let $R/I$ be the quotient group of additive groups. Then:

a. the formula $(a + I) \cdot (b + I) = (ab + I)$ gives a well-defined binary operation on $R/I$.
b. Using this binary operation as multiplication, $R/I$ is a ring; and
c. The *canonical project* $\pi : R \to R/I$ (from group theory) ($\pi : a \mapsto a + I$) is a ring homomorphism, and it's kernel is $I$.

**Proof**: Let $a + I$, $b \in I$ be in $R/I$, and suppose $a + I = a' + I$ and $b + I = b' + I$. Then $a' = a + \alpha$ and $b' = b + \beta$ with $\alpha, \beta \in I$. \
$a'b' = (a + \alpha)(b + \beta) = ab + a\beta + \alpha(b + \beta)$ \
and $a\beta + \alpha(b + \beta) \in I$, so $a'b' + I = ab + I$. \
$\therefore (a + I)(b + I)$ is well defined.

b. We already know that $R/I$ is an additive group, so it remains only to check associativity of multoplication and the two distribution laws. \
Associativity: \
$(a + I)((b + I)(c + I)) = a(bc) + I = (ab)c + I = ((a + I)(b + I))(c + I)$. \
Similarly for the distributive laws. \
c. Again, we only need to check that $\pi(ab) = \pi(a)\pi(b)$. \
This is true because $\pi(ab) = ab + I = (a + I)(b + I) = \pi(a)\pi(b)$. \
The kernel of $\pi = I$: comes from group theory.

**Corollary**: Every ideal is the kernel of some (ring) homomorphism. \
**Definition**: The ring $R/I$ is called the *quotient ring*. If $R$ is commutative, then so is $R/I$. If $R$ has 1, then so does $R/I$.

**Example**: Let $m \in \mathbb{Z}$ \
Then $m\mathbb{Z} = \{mn : n \in \mathbb{Z}\}$ is an ideal in $\mathbb{Z}$ (it's an additive subgroup $\langle m \rangle$, and if $mn \in m\mathbb{Z}$ and $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ then $k(mn) = (mn)k = m(nk)$ is in $m\mathbb{Z}$. So it's ideal. \
Then the quotient ring $\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z}$ is the same as $\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z}$ we defined earlier because $\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z}$ (the quotient ring) is $\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z}$ as an additive group, and multiplication is the same.

**Theorem** (First Isomorphism Theorem): Let $\phi : R \to S$ be a ring homomorphism and let $I = \ker{\phi}$. Then $I$ is an an ideal. Also defined $\psi : R/I \to \im{\phi}$ by $a + I \mapsto \phi(a)$. This is well defined by group theory, and is bijective by group theory. It is a ring homomorphism because $\psi((a + I)(b + I)) = \psi(ab + I) = \phi(ab) = \phi(a)\phi(b) = \psi(a + I)\psi(b + I)$. \
$\therefore$ it's a ring homomorphism. So it's a ring isomorphism. \
Then an arbitrary homomorphism $\phi : R \to S$ can be split up as before: let $I = \ker{\phi}$ \
$R \xrightarrow{\pi} R/I \xrightarrow{\sim} \im{\phi} \xrightarrow S$.

**Definition**: Let $A$ and $B$ be *subsets* of a ring $R$. Then \
a. $A + B = \{a + b : a \in A\ \text{and}\ b \in B\}$ (as in group theory).
b. $AB = \{\sum\limits{i = 1}^n a_ib_i : n \in \mathbb{N}, a_i \in A\ \forall i = 1, \ldots, n,\ \text{and}\ b_i \in B\ \forall i = 1, \ldots, n\}$ (don't forget these are *finite sums*!!)

**Theorem** (Second Isomorphism Theorem): Let $R$ be a ring, let $A$ be a subring of $R$ and let $B$ be an ideal in $R$. Then $A + B$ is a subring of $R$, $B$ is an ideal in $A + B$, $A \cap B$ is an ideal in $A$, and $A/(A \cap B) \cong (A + B)/B$ (via $a + (A \cap B) \mapsto a + B$). \
**Proof**: $A + B$ is a subgring: it's a subgroup (from group theory), and closed under multiplication because $(a_1 + b_1)(a_2 + b_2) = a_1a_2 + a_1b_2 + b_1(a_2 + b_2) \in A + B$. \
$B$ is an ideal in $A + B$ because $B \subseteq A + B$ and $B$ is an ideal in $R$ (so if any $b \in B$ and $r \in A + B$ then $br \in B$ because $r \in R$ and $rb \in B$ because $r \in R$). Then, from group theory, $f : A \to (A + B)/B$ ($a \mapsto a + B$) is onto and $and has kernel $A \cap B$, so $A \cap B$ is an ideal in $A$, and we get the isomorphism $\frac{A}{A \cap B} \xrightarrow{\sim} \frac{A + B}{B}$ from the First Isom. Thm.

**Theorem** (Third Isomorphism Theorem): If $I$ and $J$ are ideal in $R$ and $I \subseteq J$, then $J/I$ is an ideal in $R/I$, and $\frac{R/I}{J/I} \cong R/J$. \
**Proof**: Map $R/I \to R/J$. It's onto with kernel $J/I$. As in group theory.

**Theorem** (Fourth Isomomorphism Theorem): Let $R$ be a ring and let $I$ be an ideal in $R$. Then $\exists$ a bijection $\{\text{subrings of $R$ than contain I}\} \to \{\text{subrings of $R/I$}\}$. Moreover, this preserves idealness and inclusion. \
**Proof**: that a subgroup of $R$ (under +) that contains $I$ is a subring $\iff$ its counterpart in $R/I$ is a subring is an exercise.
