# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-04-18
- gcd's
- P.I.D.'s

Skip universal side divisors (p. 277) and Dedekind-Hasse norms (p. 281 - 2)

**Correction**: Last time I mentioned Ex 8.4.14 (when showing that $F[x]$ is a Euclidean domain). That should have been 7.4.14.

**Definition**: Let $R$ be a commutative ring, and let $a, b \in R$

a. We say $a \mid b$ (or $a$ *divides* $b$ or $a$ is a *divisor* of b, or $b$ is a *multiple* of $a$) if $ax = b$ for some $x \in R$.
b. A common divisor of $a$ and $b$ is an element $d \in R$ such that $d \mid a$ and $d \mid b$.
c. A *greatest common divisor* of $a$ and $b$ is an element $d \in R$ such that
    i. $d$ is a common divisor of $a$ and $b$, and
    ii. if $d'$ is another common divisor of $a$ and $b$, then $d' \mid d$

(common multiples and least common multiples are defined similarly, see the homework).
Compare with the definition in $\mathbb{Z}$:
    i. There is no "$\le$" in $R$ (usually), so we don't require gcd's to be $> 0$.
    ii. w define $\gcd(0, 0)$ (it's 0)

**Existence**: there exists ring in which not all gcd's exist. \
**Uniqueness**: **Lemma**: Let $R$ be a commutative ring, and let $a, b \in R$. Then:

a. $a \mid b \iff b \in (a) \iff (b) \subseteq (a)$
b. $d \in R$ is a common divisor of $a$ and $b$ $\iff$ $(d) \supseteq (a, b)$.
c. $d \in R$ is a gcd of $a$ and $b$ if and only if $(d)$ is the smallest principal ideal containing $(a, b)$.

**Proof**: $(a)$ and $(b)$ should be easy exercises. \
(c). d is a gcd $\iff$ $d$ is a common divisor and $d'$ a common divisor $\implies$ $d' \mid d$ \
(a), (b) $\iff$ $(d) \supseteq (a, b)$ and if $(d') \supseteq (a, b)$ then $(d') \supseteq (d)$. \
$\iff$ $(d)$ is the smallest principal ideal containing $(a, b)$. \
**Corollary**: If both $d$ and $d'$ are gcd's of $a$ and $b$, then $(d) = (d')$. Furthermore, if $R$ is an integral domain, then $d = ud'$ for some unit $u \in R$. \
**Proof**: first part: the smallest element of a poset is unique (if it exists). \
The second part is then by Ex. 7.4.8 ($(d) = (d') \iff d = ud' for some unit u$) \

**Definition**: Let $R$ be a commutative ring with 1. Then elements $a, b \in R$ are *associates* if $a = ub$ for some unit u of $R$. This is an equivalence relation.

**Examples**: In $\mathbb{Z}$, $a$ and $b$ are associates $\iff$ $a = \pm b$. In a Euclidean domain, $a$ and $b$ are associates $\iff$ $a = b = 0$ or $b \neq 0$ and $\frac{a}{b}$ is a unit. \
So, gcd's in an integral domain are unique up to associates. \
So, for this definition of gcd, in $\mathbb{Z}$, gcd's are only unique up to sign. \
But, in a Euclidean domain, we can still use the Euclidean algorithm to compute gcd's . (See homework.) \
In a Euclidean domain, gcd's exist (to be proved shortly).

## Principal Ideal Domains
**Definition**: A *principal ideal domain* is an integral domain in which every ideal is principal.

**Proposition**: Let $R$ be a Euclidean domain with (Euclidean) norm $N$. Let $I$ be a non-zero ideal in $R$, and let $d$ be a nonzero element of $I$ having minimal norm (among nonzero elements of $I$). \
Then $I = (d)$. \
**Proof**: First of all $d$ exists because the $\{N(d) : d \in I, d \neq \emptyset\}$ is a nonempty subset of $\mathbb{N}$, so it has a smallest element. \
Then $(d) \subseteq I$ because $d \in I$.

On the other hand, let $a \in I$. Write $a = qd + r$ with $q, r \in R$ and ($r \neq 0$ or $N(r) < N(d)$). Then we must have $r = 0$ (otherwise, since $r = a - qd$ and $a, d \in I$, $r \in I$, and $r \neq 0$ with $N(r) < N(d)$, contradicting the choice of $d$). Then $a = qd$, so $a \in (d)$. This shows $I \subseteq (d)$. Therefore $I = (d)$.

**Theorem**: If $R$ is a Euclidean domain, then $R$ is a P.I.D. \
**Proof**: Let $R$ be a Euclidean domain, and let $I$ be an ideal of $R$. If $I = 0$ then $I = (0)$ is principal. Otherwise $I \neq 0$, so $I = (d)$ for $d$ as in the proposition.

**Proposition**: IN a P.I.D. (or a Euclidean domain) gcd's exist. \
**Proof**: Let $R$ be a $P.I.D.$ and let $a, b \in R$. Then $(a, b) = (d)$ for some $d \in R$. That shows that $d$ is a gcd of $a$ and $b$.

**Examples**:

1. $\mathbb{Z}$ is a P.I.D., so are all Euclidean domains
2. $\mathbb{R}[x, y]$ is not a P.I.D., because its ideal $(x, y)$ is not principal. Therefore, it's not a Euclidea domain, either. However, $\gcd(x, y)$ exists ($= 1$, or any nonzero constant polynomial).

**Proposition** Let $R$ be a P.I.D. and let $a, b \in R$. Then:

a. $\gcd(a, b)$ exists, and equals $d$ for any $d$ such that $(d) = (a, b)$. \
b. FOr such $d$, $d = ax + by$ for some $a, b \in R$.

**Proof**:

a. Was already noted (if $(a, b) = (d)$ then (d) is the smallest principal ideal containing $(a, b)$).
b. With $d$ as above, $d \in (a, b) = \{ax + by : x, y \in R\}$ The = is true because any ideal containing $a$ and $b$ must also contain $ax + by\ \forall x, y \in R$. So $(a, b) \supseteq \{ax + by : x, y \in R\}$. On the other hand, $a, b \in \{ax + by : x, y \in R\}$, and $\{ax + by : x, y \in R\}$ is an ideal in $R$.

**Note**: in $\mathbb{R}[x, y]$, you *can't* write $\gcd(x, y)$ as an $R$-linear combination of $x$ and $y$.

**Proposition**: In a P.I.D., every nonzero prime ideal is a maximal ideal. \
**Proof**: Let $P$ be a nonzero prime ideal. Then $P = (p)$ for some $p \in R$, $p \neq 0$. \
Let I be some ideal of $R$ with $P \subseteq I \subseteq R$. We want to show that $I = P$ or $I = R$. \
Then $I = (m)$. \
Since $p \in P$ and $P \subseteq I$, $p \in I$, so $p = mx$ for some $x \in R$. Since $P$ is prime and $mx \in P$, either $m \in P$ or $x \in P$. \
If $m \in P$ then $(m) \subseteq P$, so $I \subseteq P$, $\therefore$ $I = P$ because $I \supseteq P$. \
If $x \in P$ then $x = ps$ for some $s \in R$, so $p = mx = mps$, $\therefore$ $ms = 1$, so $m$ is a unit and $(m) = R$. $\therefore$ $I = P$ or $I = R$, so $P$ is maximal.
