# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-03-30
- Ex. 24 p. 249
- Principal, Maximal, Prime Ideals

For Friday, read App. I, Sect. 2 (Zorn's Lemma)

## Excercise 24, p. 249
Let $\phi : R \to S$ be a ring homomorphism.

a. If $J$ is an ideal in $S$ then $\phi^{-1}(J)$ is an ideal in $R$
**Proof**: By group theory, it's an additive subgroup. Let $r \in R$ and $a \in \phi^{-1}(J)$. Then $\phi(ar) = \phi(a)\phi(r) \in J$ because $\phi(a) \in J$ and $\phi(r) \in S$. $\therefore$ $ar \in \phi^{-1}(J)$. Similarly, $ra \in \phi^{-1}(J)$. $\therefore$ $J$ is an ideal (of $R$). \
As a corollary, if $R$ is a *subring* of $S$ and $J$ is an ideal of $S$ then $J \cap R$ is an ideal of $R$. \
This follows from the excercise by letting $\phi : R \to S$ be the inclusion map ($\phi(r) = r\ \forall r \in R$). \
b. If $\phi$ is surjective and $I$ is an ideal in $R$ then $\phi(I)$ is an ideal in $S$. \
**Proof**: Let $s \in S$ and $b \in \phi(I)$. Write $s = \phi(r)$ and $b = \phi(a)$ with $r \in R$ and $a \in I$. Then $ar \in I$, so $bs = \phi(a)\phi(r) = \phi(ar) \in \phi(I)$ and similarly $sb \in \phi(I)$. $\therefore$ $\phi(I)$ is an ideal in $S$ (also known from the fourth isomorphism theorem because $S = R / \ker{\phi}$. \
Give an example in which $\phi$ is not surjective and $\phi(I)$ is not an ideal of $S$. Let $\phi : \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Q}$ be the inclusion map, and let $I = 2\mathbb{Z}$. Then $I$ is an ideal in $\mathbb{Z}$ but not in $\mathbb{Q}$, because $2 \in 2\mathbb{Z}$ and $\frac{1}{2} \in \mathbb{Q}$ but $\frac{1}{2} \cdot 2 = 1 \not\in 2\mathbb{Z}$.

**Recall**: If $A$ and $B$ are subsets of a ring $R$, then $AB = \{\sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n} a_ib_i : n \in \mathbb{N}\ \text{and}\ a_i \in A, b_i \in B\ \forall i = 1, \ldots, n\}$. Let $R$ be a ring with 1. \
**Proposition**: Let $A$ be a susbset of $R$, and let $I = RAR = \{\sum\limits_{i = 1}^n r_ia_ir'_i : n \in \mathbb{N}\ \text{and}\ a_i \in A, r_i, r'_i \in R\ \forall i\}$. Then:

a. $I$ is an ideal of $R$
b. $I \supseteq A$
c. all ideals $J$ of $R$ that contain $A$ also contain $I$

**Proof**:

a. I contains 0 (the empty sum), so $I \neq \emptyset$. If $x, y \in I$ then $x = \sum\limits_{i = 1}^n r_ia_ir'_i, y = \sum\limits_{i = n + 1}^m r_ia_ir'_i, x - y = r_1a_1r'_1 + \ldots + r_na_nr'_n + (-r_{n + 1})a_{n + 1}r'_{n + 1} + \ldots + (-r_m)ar_m' \in I$. $\therefore$ I is an additvie subgroup. Let $x \in I$ (as above) and $r \in R$. Then $rx = \sum_{i = 1}^n(rr_i)a_ir'_i \in I$ and similarly $xr \in I$.
b. Let $a \in A$. Then $a = 1 \cdot a \cdot 1$, so $a \in I$.
c. If $J$ is an ideal of $R$ and $J \supseteq A$, then for any $x = \sum\limits_{i = 1}^n r_ia_ir_i' \in I$, $a_i \in A \implies a_i \in J \implies r_ia_ir'_i \in J\ \text{(J is an ideal)}\ \implies \sum\limits_{i = 1}^n r_ia_ir'_i \in J$. $\therefore$ $J \supseteq I$. $\therefore$ $I$ is the smallest ideal of $R$ that contains $A$.

**Corollary**: $I$ is the smallest ideal of $R$ that contains $A$, and $I = \bigcap\limits_{\text{$J$ an ideal of $R$} \\ J \supseteq A} J$. \
**Proof**: (c) $\implies$ $I \subseteq \bigcap\limits_{\text{$J$ an ideal of $R$} \\ J \supseteq A} J$ \
$I$ is among the ideals of $J$ in the intersection (by (a) and (b)), so $I \supset \bigcap\limits_{\text{$J$ an ideal of $R$} \\ J \supseteq A} J$

**Definition**: Let $A$ be a subset of $R$. Then:

a. $I = RAR$ is called *the ideal* (of $R$) *generated by A*, and is denoted by (A).
b. An ideal is *principal* if it can be generated by a one-element subset $\{a\}$ of $R$. This is denoted $(a)$.
c. An ideal is *finitely generated* if it can be generated by a finite subset $\{a_1, \ldots, a_n\}$. This is denoted $(a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_n)$. (Similarly, the left ideal in $R$ generated by $A$ is $RA$, principal left ideal, finitely generated left ideal are defined. Same for right ideals $AR$). \
If $R$ is commutative, then left ideals = right ideals = two-sided ideals and $RA = AR = RAR = (A)$.

**Examples**:

1. In $\mathbb{Z}$, let's find all the ideals. If $I \subseteq \mathbb{Z}$ is an ideal, then it's a subgroup, equal to $m\mathbb{Z} = \{n \in \mathbb{Z} : m \mid n\}$, with $m \in \mathbb{N}$. All of these subgroups are ideals, because if $j \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $n \in m\mathbb{Z}$ then $m \mid nj$ so $nj \in m\mathbb{Z}$. (Incidentally, $m\mathbb{Z}$ is the principal ideal $(m)\ \forall m \in \mathbb{N}$.) So sometimes $\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z}$ is written $\mathbb{Z}/(m)$.
2. In any ring $R$ (with $1 \neq 0$), principal ideal $(0)$ is the ideal $\{0\}$, and the principal ideal $(1)$ is the whole ring. This is called the *unit ideal*.
3. Non-principal ideals: \
Let $R = \mathbb{R}[x][y]$ (usually written $\mathbb{R}[x, y]$) \
Let $I = \ker{\phi}$ with $\phi : \mathbb{R}[x, y] \to \mathbb{R}$ given by taking the constant term. \
$I = \{f \in \mathbb{R}[x, y] : f(0, 0) = 0\} = \{f \in \mathbb{R}[x, y] : \text{constant term} = 0\}$.
Then $I$ is not principal. (Proof later) $I = (x, y)$. \
Another non-principal ideal: $\{f \in \mathbb{Z}[x] : \text{const. term is even}\}$ this equals $(2, x)$.

**Proposition**: Let $I$ be an ideal of $R$. Then

a. $I = R \iff \text{$I$ contains a unit}$.
b. Assume that $R$ is commuative: $(u) = R \iff \text{$u$ is a unit}$.
c. $\text{$R$ is a field} \iff \text{$R$ is commutative and the only ideals of $R$ are $(0)$ and $(1)$}$

**Proof**:

a. See book
b. "$\impliedby$" follows from (a) because $u \in (u)$ \
"$\implies$": $1 \in (u)$ so $1 = uv$ for some $v \in R$. $\therefore$ $u$ is a unit (it has inverse $v$).
c. $R$ is a field $\iff$ $R$ has $1 \neq 0$ (already assumed), $R$ is commutative, $R^{\times} = R \setminus \{0\}$. If $R$ is a field and $I$ is a nonzero ideal of $R$, then $I \supseteq (a)$ with $a \neq 0$. Then $a$ is a unit, so $(a) = R$, $\therefore I = R$. \
"$\impliedby$": need to show all nonzero $a \in R$ are units. \
$a \neq 0 \implies (a) \neq (0) \implies (a) = R \implies a \in R^{\times}$ by (b).

**Definition**: Let $S$ be any ring (need not have 1). Then an ideal $M$ in $S$ is maximal if $M \neq S$ and the only ideals of $S$ that contain $M$ are $M$ and $S$. Maximal among proper ($\neq S$) ideals of $S$.
