---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{amsmath}
---

# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-01-22
- Well-defined functions
- Properties of $\mathbb{Z}$

### Homework due Fri. 2016-01-29:
- 0.1: 5, 7
- 0.2: 1d
- 0.3: 2, 12, 13, 14

## Error in Proposition 1 (0.1)
$f : A \to B$ is injective if and only if it has a left inverse. If $A = \emptyset$, $B = {1}$ then $f : A \to B$ is one-to-one but there's no left inverse $g : B \to A$ because there's no function $g : B \to A$.
Attempted proof that $f$ is one-to-one $\implies$ there's a left inverse:
Define $g : B \to A$ by $g(b) = a$ if $b \in f(A)$ and $a \in A$ satisfies $f(a) = b$
(there's only one such $a$ because $f$ is one-to-one $\therefore$ $g$ is well defined)
If $b \not\in f(A)$ then let $g(b) =$ any element of $A$ (assumes that $A \neq \emptyset$ (where things went wrong)).

Note: Part 3 is still true. The above proof works if $f$ is bijective (includes $f : \emptyset \to \emptyset$), because the 2nd part never comes up.
(3. f is bijective $\iff$ $f$ has a two-sided inverse $g$.)

## Well-Defined
Define $f : \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}$ by $f(x) = \begin{cases} |x| & x \ge 0 \\ x & x \le 1 \end{cases}$ is well-defined (sets not disjoint, but this is OK becuase $|x| = x$ where they overlap.
On the other hand, $g : \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}$ given by $g(x) = \begin{cases} |x| & x \ge 0 \\ 2x & x \le 1 \end{cases}$ is not well-defined since $g(\frac{1}{2}) = \frac{1}{2}$ if you use the first part, but $g(\frac{1}{2}) = 1$ if you use the second part.

More typical example:
$f : [-1, 1] \to \mathbb{R}$ defined by $f(x) = \sin(\theta)$, where $\theta$ is such that $\cos(\theta) = x$ is not well-defined:
$f(\frac{1}{2})$ if $\theta = \frac{\pi}{3}$ then $f(x)$ would be $\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}$ \
                 if $\theta = \frac{\pi}{3}$ then $f(x)$ would be $\frac{-\sqrt{3}}{2}$
(this is not really $f(x) = \sin(\cos^{-1}(x))$

Is well-defined: $f(x) = |\sin(\theta)|$, if $\theta$ is such that $\cos(\theta) = x$.

## Properties of the Integers

### Well-Ordering Property of $\mathbb{N}$
Any *non-empty* subset $A$ of $\mathbb{N}$ has a smallest element (*smallest element* means an element $m \in A$ such that $m \le a$ for all $a \in A$).

**Definition**: let $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$. We say that $a \mid b$ ($a$ divides $b$) iff there is an integer $q$ such that $aq = b$ (I do not require $a \neq 0$). \
If $a$ does not divide $b$, we write $a \nmid b$.

**Examples**: $-7 \mid 21$, $0 \mid 0$ (any $q$ will work), $3 \mid 0$, $0 \nmid 3$, $2 \nmid 7$

**Theorem** (Division Algorithm): For all $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$ with $b \neq 0$ there exist unique integers $q$ and $r$ such that $a = qb + r$ and $0 \le r < |b|$.

**Proof**:

- Case 1: $b > 0$
    - Uniqueness: Suppose $q, r, q', r' \in \mathbb{Z}$ satisfy $a = qb + r = q'b + r'$, $0 \le r < b$, $0 \le r' < b$ \
Then $qb - q'b = r' - r$ \
$q - q' = \frac{r' - r}{b}$, $r' - r < b$, similarly $r' - r > -b$ \
So $1 < \frac{r - r'}{b} < 1$, $-1 < q - q' < 1$ (where $q - q' \in \mathbb{Z}$) so $q - q' = 0$, $r' - r = 0$.
    - Existence: Let $A = \{a - qb \mid q \in \mathbb{Z}\} \cap \mathbb{N}$ \
Then $A$ is a subset of $\mathbb{N}$. \
Want to check that $A \neq \emptyset$. \
If $a \ge 0$ then $a \in A$ (take $q = 0$, note that $a \in \mathbb{N}$) \
If $a < 0$ then take $q = a$. \
Then $a - ab \in A$ because you can take $q = a$ and $a - ab = (-a)(b - 1) \ge 0$ it it's in $\mathbb{N}$. \
By the well-ordering property of $\mathbb{N}$, the set $A$ has a smallest element $r$. Since $r \in A$,
    i. $r = a - qb$ for some $q \in \mathbb{Z}$, so $a = qb + r$
    ii. $r \ge 0$ because $r \in A \subseteq \mathbb{N}$
    iii. $r < b$, because if $r \ge b$ then $r - b \ge 0$ and $r = a - (q + 1)b$, so $r - b \in A$ so $r$ is not the smallest element of A ($r - b < r$).
- Case 2: $b < 0$
By case I, $a = q(-b) + r$ for some $q, r \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $0 \le r < -b = |b|$. Then $a = (-q)b + r$.
QED

**Definition**: If $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $a \mid b$ then we say that $a$ is a *divisor* of $b$, and the $b$ is a *multiple* of $a$. \
**Definition**: If $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$ then a *common divisor* of $a$ and $b$ is an integer $d$ such that $d \mid a$ and $d \mid b$. \
**Definition**: If $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$, not both zero. The *greatest common divisor* of $a$ and $b$ is a positive integer $d$ such that

i. $d$ is a common divisor of $a$ and $b$
ii. $d' \mid d$ whenever $d'$ is a common divisor of $a$ and $b$

We write $d = \gcd(a, b)$ \
(Note: $\gcd(0, 0)$ is not defined.) \
*Also*: $\gcd(a, b) = \gcd(b, a)$

**Theorem**: For all $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$, not both zero, there is a unique gcd of $a$ and $b$ \
**Proof**:

- *Uniqueness*: Suppose $d_1$ and $d_2$ both satisfy the definitionfor $gcd(a, b)$. \
                Then $d_1 \mid d_2$ because $d_1$ is a common divisor and $d_2$ satisfies (ii). $d_1 \le d_2$ because $d_2 > 0$.
                If $d_1 > d_2$ and $d_1 r = d_2$ then $r = \frac{d_1}{d_2} < 1$ so $f \not\in \mathbb{Z}$ or $r \le 0 \implies d \le 0$ not true
                Similarly $d_2 \mid d_1$ so $d_2 \le d_1 \therefore d_1 = d_2$
- *Existence*: Euclidean algorithm (next time).
