# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-04-08
- Maximal & prime ideals
- Zorn's lemma

Homework due 2016-04-15: \
Sect. 7.4: 14, 27, 36 \
Sect. 7.5: 2, 3, 4

Homework due 2016-04-18: \
Extra assignment (see sheet).

**Example**: Ideals in $\mathbb{Z}$. \
Let $I$ be an ideal in $\mathbb{Z}$. Then it's an additive subgroup: \
$I = m\mathbb{Z} = \langle m \rangle = \{ mn : n \in \mathbb{Z} \} = (m)$ (this is an ideal (principal ideal)). \
So $\{\text{ideals of ideals of $\mathbb{Z}$}\} = \{(m) : m \in \mathbb{N}\}$. Also: every ideal of $\mathbb{Z}$ is principal. \
What about the ideal $(a, b)$ in $\mathbb{Z}$?

**Note**: $(d) \le (a) \iff d \in (a) \iff a \mid d$ \
So, $(a, b) \le (d) \iff a \in (d)$ and $b \in (d)$ \
$\iff d \mid a$ and $d \mid b$ \
$\iff$ $d$ is a common divisor of $a$ and $b$. \
Now $(a, b) = (m)$ where $m$ is the largest number that $(a, b) \le m$ so $m$ is the largest common divisor of $a$ and $b$, $m = \gcd(a, b)$. \
So $(a, b)$ (ideal generated by $a$ and $b$) = $((a, b))$ (principal ideal generated by $\gcd(a, b) = (a, b)$). \
**Recall**: An ideal of $M$ in a ring $R$ is said to be maximal if:

i. $M \neq R$, and
ii. there are no ideals $M'$ *strictly between* $M$ and $R$: $M \subsetneq M' \subsetneq R$.

**Proposition**: Let $R$ be a commutative ring with 1, and let $M$ be an ideal in $R$. Then $M$ is maximal $\iff$ $R/M$ is a field. \
**Recall**: $R/M$ is a field $\iff$ $R/M$ is commutative (always true (because $R$ is commutative)), $R/M$ has $1 \neq 0$ ($R/M$ always has 1 (since $R$ has 1)) and all nonzero elements of $R/M$ are units (proved last time: If $R/M$ has $1 \neq 0$, then it's a field $\iff$ it's commutative its only ideals are $(0)$ and $(1)$ $\iff$ only ideals are $(0)$ and $(1)$ (assuming the other conditions are true)). \
So this is true \
$\iff R/M \neq 0$ \
$\iff M \neq R$
$\iff$ the only ideals of $M'$ with $M \subseteq M' \subseteq R$ are $M$ and $R$.

**Definition**: Let $R$ be a commutative ring with 1. An ideal $P$ of $R$ is *prime* if

i. $P \neq R$ and
ii. for all $x, y \in R$, $xy \in P \implies x \in P$ or $y \in P$

**Proposition**: Let $R$ be as above. Then an ideal $P$ of $R$ is prime $\iff$ $R/P$ is an integral domain.

**Proof**: $R/P$ is an integral domain if and only if:

i. $R/P$ is commutative,
ii. $R/P$ has $1 \neq 0$, and
iii. $R/P$ has no zero divisors \
Again, (i) is automative, and (ii) $\iff \P \neq R$ \
(iii) $\iff \bar{x}\bar{y} = \bar{0} \implies \bar{x} = \bar{0}$ or $\bar{y} = \bar{0}\ \forall \bar{x}, \bar{y} \in R/P$ ($\bar{x}$ means $x \in R$ and $\bar{x} = x + P$) $\iff xy \in P \implies x \in P$ or $y \in P\ \forall x, y \in R$.

**Corollary**: Let $R$ be a commutative ring with 1. Then all maximal ideals of $R$ are prime. \
**Proof**: Let $M$ be an ideal of $R$. THen $M$ is maximal $\iff$ $R/M$ is a field $\implies$ $R/M$ is entire (= integral domain) $\iff$ $M$ is prime. \
**Example**: Maximal and prime ideals in $\mathbb{Z}$. Let $I$ be an ideal in $\mathbb{Z}$. THen $I = (m)$ for some $m \in \mathbb{N}$.\
$m = 0$: Then $\mathbb{Z}/I = \mathbb{Z}/(0) \cong \mathbb{Z}$, which is an integral domain but not a field. So $(0)$ is prime but not maximal ($(0) \subsetneq (2) \subsetneq (1)$). \
$m \neq 0$: If $m$ is prime then $(\mathbb{Z}/(m))^{\times} = \mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z} \setminus \{\bar{0}\}$ so $\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z}$ is maximal, and prime. (or: $(m) \subsetneq (n) \subsetneq 1 \iff 1 < n < m$ and $n \mid m$ so this shows that if $m$ is composite then $(m)$ is not maximal. If $m$ is not prime then either $m = 1$ ($\implies (m) = \mathbb{Z}$, so $(m)$ is not prime) or $m = ab$ with $a, b > 1$, so $a, b \not\in (m)$ but $ab \in (m)$, so $(m)$ is not prime. \
$\therefore$ $(m)$ is prime $\iff$ $m$ is prime or $m = 0$ \
$(m)$ is maximal $\iff$ $m$ is prime

## Zorn's Lemma
**Definition**: Let $A$ be a set. Then a *partitial ordering* on $A$ is a relation $\le$ on $A$ that is:

1. reflexive ($x \le x\ \forall x \in A$),
2. antisymmetric ($x \le y$ and $y \le x$, then $x = y$, $\forall x, y \in A$), and
3. transitive (if $x \le y$ and $y \le z$ then $x \le z$, $\forall x, y, z \in A$).

A total ordering on $A$ is a partial ordering $\le$ on $A$ such that, $x \le y$ or $y \le x$ $\forall x, y \in A$. A partially ordered set is a set with a partial ordering on it (this is also called a *poset*). *Totally ordered set* is defined similarly.

**Examples**:
- $\mathbb{R}$ is totally ordered under the usual $\le$.
- The set of subgroups of a group is partially ordered under $\le$ (but not under $\trianglelefteq$ (not transitive)).
- Any collection of sets is partially ordered under $\subseteq$

**Definition**: Let $A$ be a partially ordered set. Then:

1. a *chain* in $A$ is a totally ordered subset of $A$ (same ordering as on $A$)
2. an *upper bound* for any subset $B \subseteq A$ is an element $m \in A$ such that $x \le m\ \forall x \in B$
3. A *maximal element* of $A$ is an element $m \in A$ such taht $m \le x \implies x = m\ \forall x \in A$.

**Examples**: A maximal ideal in a ring $R$ is a maximal element in the set of all proper ($\neq R$) ideals of $R$. There may be many of these. If $A = \emptyset$ then there is exactly one relation on $A$, and it is a total ordering on $A$. $\therefore$ $\emptyset$ is a poset, and for any poset $A$, $\emptyset \subseteq A$ is a chain in $A$. \
**Incidentally**: if $A$ is a poset, then a largest element of $A$ is an element $M \in A$ such that $x \le M\ \forall x \in A$. There is at most one of these. largest $\implies$ maximal.

**Zorn's Lemma**: Let $A$ be a nonempty partially ordered set, in which every nonempty chain has an upper bound. Then $A$ has a maximal element.
