# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-04-15
- Chinese Remainder Theorem
- Euclidean domains

Homework 4/22: \
Sect. 7.6: 1, 3, 5c, 7 \
Sect. 8.1: 3, 7, 11 \
Sect. 8.2: 8 (Assume $D \neq \emptyset$ and $0 \not\in D$)

## Chinese Remainder Theorem
**Theorem** (Chinese Remainder Theorem): Let $R$ be a commutative ring with 1, and let $A_1, \ldots, A_k$ be ideals in $R$.

a. The map $\phi : R \to (R/A_1) \times \cdots \times (R/A_k)$ is a ring homomorphism and its kernel is $A_1 \cap \ldots \cap A_k$.
b. Assume that $A_i$ and $A_j$ are comaximal $\forall i \neq j$. Then $A_1 \cap \ldots \cap A_k = A_1A_2 \ldots A_k$, and $\phi$ induces an isomorphism $R/A_1A_2 \ldots A_k = R/(A_1 \cap \ldots \cap A_k) \cong (R/A_1) \times \cdots \times (R/A_k)$.

**(Non-)Proof**: We proved the $k = 2$ case already. The cases $k > 2$ are proved by induction (see the book). It's also true for $k = 1$ (easy), and for $k = 0$ $(A_1 \ldots A_k = A_1 \cap \ldots A_k = R$ and $(R/A_1) \times \ldots \times (R/A_k) = (0)$). \
**Example**: Find all residue classes $x \mod{21}$ that satisfy $x^2 \equiv 4 \pmod{21}$. \
We have $\mathbb{Z}/21\mathbb{Z} \cong (\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}) \times (\mathbb{Z}/7\mathbb{Z})$. \
If $n \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $n^2 \equiv 4 \pmod{21})$ then $x^2 \equiv 4 \pmod{3}$ and $x^2 \equiv 4 \pmod{7}$. And conversely if $n^2 \equiv 4 \pmod{3}$ and $n^2 \equiv 4 \pmod{7}$ then $a = (\bar{n}, \bar{n}) \in (\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}) \times (\mathbb{Z}/7\mathbb{Z})$ satisfies $a^2 = (\bar{4}, \bar{4})$ \
$\therefore$ (applying $\phi^{-1}$): $b = \bar{n} \in \mathbb{Z}/21\mathbb{Z}$ satisfies $b^2 = \bar{4} \in \mathbb{Z}/21\mathbb{Z}$. \
Solve $x^2 \equiv 4 \pmod{3}$ \
$0^2 = 0 \not\equiv 4$ \
$1^2 = 1 \equiv 4$ \
$2^2 = 4 \equiv 4$ \
Solutions are $1, 2 \pmod{3}$ \
Solve $x^2 \equiv 4 \pmod{7}$

|---------------|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| $n$           | 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 |
| $n^2 \mod{7}$ | 0 | 1 | 4 | 2 | 2 | 4 | 1 |

Solutions are $2, 5 \pmod{7}$

| $x \mod{3}$ | $x \mod{7}$ | $x \mod{21}$ |
|-------------|-------------|--------------|
| 1           | 2           | 16           |
| 1           | 5           | 19           |
| 2           | 2           | 2            |
| 2           | 5           | 5            |

Slightly bigger example (part of Ex. 4 p. 248): \
Solve for $x^2 \equiv x \pmod{30}$ \
$\mathbb{Z}/30\mathbb{Z} \cong (\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}) \times (\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}) \times (\mathbb{Z}/5\mathbb{Z})$ \
all with solutions (0, 1) of $x^2 \equiv x \pmod{2, 3, 5}$ \
(If $p$ is prime then $\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z}$ is a field, $\therefore$ it's an integral domain. \
So $x^2 = x$ in $\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z} \iff x(x - 1) = 0 \iff x = 0 \lor x = 1$

| $n \mod{2}$ | $n \mod{3}$ | $n \mod{5}$ | $n \mod{30}$ |
|-------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|
| 0           | 0           | 0           | 0            |
| 0           | 0           | 1           | 6            |
| 0           | 1           | 0           | 10           |
| 0           | 1           | 1           | 16           |
| 1           | 0           | 0           | 15           |
| 1           | 0           | 1           | 21           |
| 1           | 1           | 0           | 25           |
| 1           | 1           | 1           | 1            |

**General idea**: to solve a given polynomial equation with integer coefficients $\mod{n} = p_1^{a_1} \cdots p_r^{a_r}$ it's equivalent to solving it $\mod{p_i^{a_i}}\ \forall i$ (assuming the $p_i$ are all distinct).

## Euclidean Domains
We'lls see that you can do the Euclidean algorithm in ring's other than $\mathbb{Z}$. Especially: $F[x]$, where $F$ is any field. *For the rest of today's lecture, all rings are assumed to be commutative*.

**Definition**: Let $R$ be an integral domain. Then:

a. A *norm* on $R$ is a function $N : R \to \mathbb{N}$ such that $N(0) = 0$.
b. A norm $N$ on $R$ is *positive* if $N(r) > 0$ for all $r \neq 0$.
c. A norm $N$ on $R$ is *Euclidean* if for all $a, b \in R$ with $b \neq 0$ there are $q, r \in R$ such that $a = qb + r$ and $r = 0$ or $N(r) < N(b)$.

**Example**: $R = \mathbb{Z}$, $N(n) = |n|$ \
$7 = 2 \cdot 3 + 1$ $N(1) = 1 < 3 = N(3)$ \
or \
$7 = 3 \cdot 3 - 2$ $N(-2) = 2 < 3 = N(3)$ \
(So we're dropping uniqueness) \

**Definition**: A *Euclidean domain* is an integral domain with a Euclidean norm. \
**Examples**:

1. $\mathbb{Z}$ is a Euclidean domain with $N(n) = |n|$
2. Similarly for $N(n) = \begin{cases} 0 & n = 0 \\ |n| - 1 & n \neq 0 \end{cases}$
3. Similarly for $N(n) = 2^{|n|} - 1$
4. $R = \{x + iy : x, y \in \mathbb{Z}\}$ (subring in $\mathbb{C}$) \
This is called the ring of Gaussian integers, $\mathbb{Z}[i]$. \
Let $N(x + iy) = x^2 + y^2 = |x + iy|^2$. \
This is a Euclidean norm on $\mathbb{Z}[i]$. \
**Proof**: $N$ maps $\mathbb{Z}[i]$ to $\mathbb{N}$ and $N(0) = 0$. easy. \
In the complex plane, $\mathbb{Z}[i]$ looks like: \
Let $\alpha, \beta \in \mathbb{Z}[i], \beta \neq 0$. \
$\mathbb{Z}[i]$ is ($\cdot$ or $\star$) \
$\beta\mathbb{Z}[i] \subseteq \mathbb{Z}[i]$ is $\star$\
$\beta = 2 + i$ \
$i\beta = -1 + 2i$

You can cover the plane with squares with vertices $(n + mi)\beta$, $(n + 1 + mi)\beta$, $n + (m + 1)\beta$, $(n + 1 + (m + 1)i)\beta$$. In each square, for any point inside that square, the distance to the nearest vertex is at most $\frac{|\beta|}{\sqrt{2}}$ \
So given $\alpha$, $\exists q \in \mathbb{Z}[i]$ such that $|q\beta - \alpha| \le \frac{\beta}{\sqrt{2}}$ so $N(q\beta - \alpha) = N(\alpha + q\beta) \le (\frac{|\beta|^2}{2} < |\beta|^2 = N(\beta)$. \
That's the "division algorithm" for $\mathbb{Z}[i]$.

See picture

5. Let $F$ be any field, and let $R = F[x]$. \
Define $N(f(x)) = \begin{cases} \deg{f} & f(x) \neq 0 \\ 0 & f(x) = 0 \end{cases}$. \
Then $N$ is a Euclidean norm, so $F[x]$ is a Euclidean domain. (See Ex. 8.4.14)
6. Let $F$ be any field and let $N : F \to \mathbb{N}$ be *any* norm. Then $N$ is a Euclidean norm. \
Given $a, b \in F$ with $b \neq 0$, let $q = \frac{d}{b}$ and $r = 0$ ($a = qb + r$). \
Let $R$ be an integral domain in which $N(r) = 0\ \forall r$ is a Euclidean norm. Then $R$ must be a field. Take any $b \in R$, $b \neq 0$, and let $a = 1$. Then $1 = qb + r$ with $q, r \in R$ and $r = 0$ or $N(r) < N(b) = 0$ (can't happen) \
$\therefore$ $1 - qb$, so $b$ is a unit $\forall$ nonzero $b \in R$. \
*$R$ is a field*

($R[x, y]$ is not a Euclidean domain)
