---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{cancel}
    - \usepackage{tikz}
---
# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-04-15
- Rings of fractions
- Chinese remainder theorem

See pictures
**Theorem**: Let $R$ be a commutative ring. Let $D$ be a subset of $R$ such that:

- $D \neq \emptyset$,
- $0 \not\in D$,
- $D$ contains no zero divisors, and
- $D$ is closed under multiplication

Let $F = R \times D$ and let $\sim$ be the relation of $G$ given by $(r, d) \sim (s, e) \iff re = sd$. \
**Then**:

a. $\sim$ is an equivalence relation on $F$.
b. Let $Q$ be the set of $\sim$-equivalence classes in $F$ \
Write $(r, d) = \frac{r}{d}$. Then $\frac{r}{d} + \frac{s}{e} = \frac{re + sd}{de}$ and $\frac{r}{d} \cdot \frac{s}{e} = \frac{rs}{de}$ given well-defined binary operations on $Q$, and they make $Q$ into a commutative ring with 1. Moreover, $1 \frac{d}{d} \forall d \in D$.
c. Let $i : R \to Q$ be the map $r \mapsto \frac{rd}{d}$ for any $d \in D$. Then $i$ is independent of the choice of $d$ and is an injective ring homomorphism
d. For all $d \in D$, $i(d)$ is a unit in $Q$, and every element of $A$ equals $i(d)^{-1}i(r)$ for some $r \in R$ and $d \in D$.
e. $Q$ is the smallest ring with 1 containing a subgring isomorphic to $R$, in which all elements of $D$ are units in $A$, in the following sense: for all rings $Q'$ with 1 and all homomorphisms $\phi : R \to Q'$ such that $\phi(d)$ is a unit of $Q'\ \forall d \in D$, there is a unique ring homomorphism $\Phi : Q \to Q'$ such that $\phi = \Phi \circ i$.

\begin{tikzpicture}[every node/.style={midway}]
    \matrix[column sep={4em,between origins}, row sep={2em}] at (0,0)
        { \node(R) {$R$}; \\
          \node(Q) {$Q$}; & \node(Q') {$Q'$}; \\};
    \draw[->] (R) -- (Q)  node[anchor=east]  {$i$};
    \draw[->] (Q) -- (Q') node[anchor=north] {$\Phi$};
    \draw[->] (R) -- (Q') node[anchor=south] {$\phi$};
\end{tikzpicture}

**Proof**:

a. Already done. \
b. We showed that $(r, d) \sim (s, e) \iff$ you can get from $(r, d)$ to $(s, e)$ by finitely many steps using only the relation $\overline{(r, d)} = \overline{(rd', dd')}$ (or it's opposite). This is left as an exercise, *except* I'll show the distributive law: \
$\frac{r}{d}(\frac{s}{e} + \frac{t}{f}) \stackrel{?}{=} \frac{r}{d} \cdot \frac{s}{e} + \frac{r}{d} \cdot \frac{t}{f}$ \
We may assume $e = f$ ($\frac{s}{e} = \frac{sf}{ef}$ and $\frac{t}{f} = \frac{te}{fe}$; then $\frac{s}{e} + \frac{t}{e} = \frac{se + te}{e^2} = \frac{s + t}{e}$). \
Then the LHS is $\frac{r}{d}$. $\frac{s + t}{e} = \frac{r(s + t)}{de} = \frac{rs + rt}{de} = \frac{rs}{de} + \frac{rt}{de} = \frac{r}{d} \cdot \frac{s}{e} + \frac{r}{d} \cdot \frac{t}{e}$. \
c. Again, $i$ is a ring homomorphism (same kind of checking). Its kernel is 0 because $r \in \ker{i} \iff i(r) = i(0) \iff \frac{rd}{d} = \frac{0d}{d} \iff rd^2 = 0d^2 \iff rd = 0d \iff r = 0$. \
(Can cancel $d$ because $d \neq 0$ and it's not a zero divisor.) \
$\frac{rd}{d'} = \frac{rd'}{d'}$ because both $= \frac{rdd'}{dd'}$.
d. $i(d)$ has inverse $\frac{1}{d}$ because $\frac{d^2}{d} \cdot \frac{1}{d} = \frac{d^2}{d} = 1 \in Q$ \
every element of $Q$ \ldots is true because $\frac{r}{d} = i(d)^{-1}i(r) = \frac{1}{d} \cdot \frac{rd}{d} = \frac{rd}{d^2} = \frac{r}{d}$.
e. Given $Q'$ and $\phi$, define $\Phi(\frac{r}{d}) = \phi(d)^{-1}\phi(r)$ (because you have no choice) $\frac{r}{d} = i(d)^{-1}i(r) \implies \Phi(\frac{r}{d})$ must equal $\Phi(i(d)^{-1})\Phi(i(r)) = \Phi(i(d))^{-1}\Phi(i(r)) = \phi(d)^{-1}\phi(r)$ (need to check: $\Phi(1_Q) = 1_{Q'} \implies \Phi(u^{-1}) = \Phi(u)^{-1}\ \forall u \in Q^{\times}$). Also need to check: $\Phi$ is a ring homomorphism. Not assuming $Q'$ is commutative. \
$\Phi$ is well defined because \
$\frac{r}{d} = \frac{s}{e}$ \
$\implies re = sd$ \
$\implies er = ds$ \
$\implies \phi(e)\phi(r) = \phi(d)\phi(s)$ \
$\implies \phi(d)^{-1}\phi(e)\phi(r) = \phi(s)$ \
$\implies \phi(e)\phi(d)^{-1}\phi(r) = \phi(s)$ \
$\implies \phi(d)^{-1}\phi(r) = \phi(e)^{-1}\phi(s)$ \
in a ring $Q'$ with 1, if $u \in Q'^{\times}$ and $t \in Q'$ commute, then so do $u^{-1}$ and $t$. Exercise. \
**Note**: If $\phi$ is injective, then so is $\Phi$. (Reverse the steps above).

**Definition**: For $R$ and $D$ as above, the ring $A$ is denoted $D^{-1}R$ or $R[D^{-1}]$ (this does not mean polynomial ring or group ring).

**Definition**: If $R$ is an integral domain, then we can let $D = R \setminus \{0\}$ in the theorem, and then $R[D^{-1}]$ is a field ($\frac{r}{d} \neq 0 \implies r \in D, so \frac{d}{r} \in Q$). \
This is called the *quotient field* of $R$ or the fraction field of $R$, or the field of fractions of $R$. \
**Example**: $\mathbb{Q}$ is the fraction field of $\mathbb{Z}$

**Corollary** (of the theorem): Every integral domain is a subring of a field (containing the field's "1"). \
$x = 1_R \implies x = x^2 \implies x(x - 1) = 0 \implies \cancel{x = 0} \lor x = 1$ \
**Corollary**: A ring is an integral domain $\iff$ it is a subring of a field that contains (the field's) 1.

## Chinese Remainder Theorem
**Definition**: Let $(R_i)_{i \in I}$ be a collection of rings. Then the *direct product* $\prod\limits_{i \in I} R_i$ (as a ring) is the abelian group given by the direct product of the additive groups of the $R_i$, with componentwise multiplication. \
For the rest of today's lecture, let $R$ be a commutative ring with 1.

**Definition**: Ideals $I$ and $J$ in $R$ are comaximal if $I + J = (1)$. \
**Examples**: Ideals in $\mathbb{Z}$:

- $(2), (3)$ are comaximal
- $(14), (10)$ are not comaximal (sum = $(2)$)
- $(m), (n)$ are comaximal $\iff$ $\gcd(m, n) = 1$. \
$1 = xm = yn \iff$ \
$\in (m) + (n)$

**Theorem** (Special case of Chinese Remainder Theorem): \
Let $I$ and $J$ be comaximal ideals in $R$. Then $\phi : R \to (R/I) \times (R/J)$ given by $r \mapsto (r + I, r + J)$ is a ring homomorphism with kernel $= I \cap J = IJ$. It is onto, and it induces an isomorphism $R/IJ = R/(I \cap J) \cong (R/I) \times (R/J)$. \
**Proof**: Ring homomorphism: easy check. (each component of $\phi$ is a natural project $R \to R/I$ or $R \to R/J$). \
$\ker{\phi} = I \cap J$: obvious. \
$I \cap J = IJ$: $IJ \subseteq I$ and $IJ \subseteq J$ because they're ideal, so $IJ \subseteq I \cap J$. \
Also let $a \in I \cap J$. Write $1 = x + y$ with $x \in I$ and $y \in J$ (using comaximality. $1 \in (1) = I + J$). \
Then, $a = a(x + y) = ax + ay$ \
$ax \in IJ$ because $x \in I$ and $a \in J$ \
$ay \in IJ$ because $y \in J$ and $a \in I$. \
$a \in IJ$ \
Onto: with $x, y$ as above, \
$\phi(x) = (0, 1)$ $x \in I$ so $x + I = 0 + I$ \
$x - 1 = -y \in J$ so $x + J = 1 + J$ \
Similarly $\phi(y) = (1, 0)$. \
$\therefore$ given any $(a + I, b + J) \in (R/I) \times (R/J)$, \
$(a + I, b + J) = \phi(ay + by)$ because $\phi(ay + bx)$ \
$= \phi(a)\phi(y) + \phi(b)\phi(x)$ \
$= (a + I, a + J)(1, 0) + (b + I, b + J)(0, 1)$ \
$= (a + I, 0) + (0, b + J)$ \
$= (a + I, b + J)$ \
Conclude by first isomorphism theorem.
