# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-04-22
- U.F.D.'s
- Polynomials

For Monday: \
Read Sections 9.2 and 13.1

Homework due April 29: \
8.3: 2 \
9.1: 8, 10, 13 \
9.2: 7, 9 \
13.1: 2, 7

**We were proving**: **Theorem**: Every P.I.D. is a U.F.D. \
**Proof**: On Wednesday, we showed every nonzero nonunit element in $R$ factors into a product of irreducibles (where $R$ is a P.I.D.) \
*Step 2*: Uniqueness. Suppose $r \in R$ is nonzero, not a unit, and has all factorizations $r = p_1p_2 \cdots p_n$ and $r = q_1q_2 \cdots q_m$, where all $p_i$ and all $q_i$ are irreducible, and $m, n \in \mathbb{N}$. Now if $m = 0$or $n = 0$ then $r = 1$, which is a unit, so $m, n > 0$. \
We may assume $n \le m$ (otherwise integerchange the two factorizations). We'll prove this by induction on $n$. \
*Base case*: $n = 1$. Then $r = p_1$, so $r$ is irreducible. If $r = q_1q_2 \cdots q_m$ with $m > 1$ then $r = ab$ where $a = q_1$ is not a unit and $b = q_2 \cdots q_m$ ($m \ge 2$) is not a unit (that would imply $q_2$ is a unit, but it's not). This contradicts irreducibility of $r = p_1$. $\therefore$ $m = 1$, so $p_1 = q_1$ and we're done. \
*Inductive Step*: Assume that if two products of $n - 1$ and $m - 1 \ge n - 1$ irreducibles are equal then $n - 1 = m - 1$ and all factors are associates after rearranging them. \
We have $p_1$ is irreducible and $p_1 \mid q_1 \cdots q_m$. \
*Lemma (Prop. 11)*: In a P.I.D., an element, every irreducible element is prime. \
*Proof*: Let $p \in R$ be irreducible. Then the ideal $(p)$ is nonzero, and we'll show that it's prime by showing that it's maximal. Let $M$ be an ideal of $R$ that contains $(p)$. $M \supseteq (p)$. Write $M = (m)$ (R is a P.I.D.). Then $p \in (m)$, so $p = mr$ for some $r \in R$. Since $p$ is irreducible, ($m$ is a unit $\implies (m) = M = R$) or ($r$ is a unit $\implies$ $m$ and $p$ are associates $\implies (m) = M = (p)$). \
Back to our proof: $p_1 \mid q_1 \cdots q_m$, so $p_1 \mid q_j$ for some $j$. After some rearranging, we may assume $j = 1$, so $p_1 \mid q_1$. Then $q_1 = p_1r$ for some $r \in R$. Since $q$ is irreducible, $r$ must be a unit (because $p_1$ isn't). $\therefore$ $p_1$ and $q_1$ are associates; $q_1 = rp_1$, $r \in R^{\times}$ \
Then $p_2 \cdots p_n = q'_2q_3 \cdots q_m$ where $q'_2 = rq_2$ is irreducible. Conclude by induction. \
$\therefore$ $R$ is a U.F.D. \
(Not every U.F.D. is a P.I.D.; later (I hope) we'll see that $F[x, y]$ is a U.F.D. for any field $F$; we already know it's not a P.I.D.)

**Proposition**: In a U.F.D. an element is prime if and only if it's irreducible. \
**Proof**:

- prime $\implies$ irreducible: already proved (on Wed.)
- irreducible $\implies$ prime: Let $p$ be irreducible. Then $p \neq 0$ and $p$ is not a unit, so we need to show only that if $p \mid ab$ then $p \mid a$ or $p \mid b$. Suppose $p \mid ab$, so $pr = ab$ for some $r \in R$. Then $p$ occurs in a factorization of the left-hand side into irreducibles, so it must occur in a factorization of $a$ or $b$ into irreducibles (by uniqueness of the factorization of $pr = ab$). $\therefore$ $p \mid a$ or $p \mid b$. (need to handle special cases: $r$, $a$ or $b$ may be units. Exercise.)

Suppose $R$ is a U.F.D. and every nonzero $r \in R$ can be written $r = up_1^{\alpha_1} \cdots p_n^{\alpha_n}$ where $u$ is a unit, $p_1, \cdots, p_n$ are irreducibles (or prime), $\alpha_i \in \mathbb{Z}_{> 0}$ for all $i$, and no $p_i$ is an associate of any $p_j$ with $i \neq j$. \
**Proof**: If $r$ is a unit then let $u = r$ and $n = 0$. Otherwise, write $r = p_1 \cdots p_n$ as a product of irreducibles. Then $r = up_1 \cdots p_r$ with $u = 1$. If none of the $p_i$, $p_j$ are associates with $i \neq j$, then done; otherwise $p_j = p_i \cdot v$ for some unit v; replace $p_j$ with $p$ and $n$ with $uv$ and compine the $p_i$s and (decrease $n$). Repeat until you're done. \
**Example**: \
$-36 = (-2) \cdot 2 \cdot 3 \cdot 3$ \\
$= (-2) \cdot 2 \cdot 3^2$ \\
$= -1 \cdot 2^2 \cdot 3^2$

**Proposition**: Let $R$ be a U.F.D., and let $a, b \in R$ \
We can write $a = up_1^{\alpha_1} \cdots p_n^{\alpha_n}$ and $b = vp_1^{\beta_1} \cdots p_n^{\beta_n}$ where $u, v$ are units, $p_1, ldots, p_n$ are irreducibles with no associates, and $\alpha_1, \ldots, \alpha_n, \beta_1, \ldots, \beta_n \in \mathbb{N}$. (Combine primes in factorizationsof $a$ and $b$, and include 0 exponents when necessary.) THen $a \mid b$ $\iff$ $\alpha_i \le \beta_i$ for all $i$ and $\prod p_i^{\min(\alpha_i, \beta_i)}$ is a gcd of $a$ and $b$. (Just like in $\mathbb{Z}$). \
**Proof**: See the book.

## More on Polynomials
Assume for the rest of today's class that $R$ is a commutative ring with $1 \neq 0$ (though most if not all will also be true for the trivial ring (where $1 = 0$)).

**Proposition**: Let $R$ be as above, and let $I$ be an ideal in $R$. Then

a. the ideal $IR[x] = (I)$ in $R[x]$ generated by the elements of $I$ equals $\{a_nx^n + a_{n - 1}x^{n - 1} + \cdots + a_0 \in R[x] : a_i \in I\ \forall i\}$ (call this $I[x]$).
b. The natural map $R[x] \to (R/I)[x]$ induces an isomorphism $R[x]/(I) \cong (R/I)[x]$, and
c. If $I$ (ideal in $R$) is prime, then so is $(I)$ (ideal in $R[x]$).

**Proof**:

a. Let $f(x) = a_nx^{n} + \cdots + a_0 \in R[x]$. If $f(x) \in I[x]$ then $a_i \in I$ for all $I$, and $\therefore$ $f(x) = \sum\limits_{i = 0}^{n} a_i \cdot x^i \in IR[x] = (I)$. \
Conversely, if $f(x) \in IR[x]$ then $f(x) = \sum\limits_{j = 1}^{m} b_jg_j(x)$ with $b_j \in I$ and $g_j(x) \in R[x]\ \forall j$. Then all coefficients of $b_jg_j(x)$ lie in $I$, so $b_jg_j(x) \in I[x]\ \forall j$. $\therefore$ so is the sum, which is $f(x)$.
b. Let $\phi : R[x] \to (R/I)[x]$ be the map that applies the natural projection $R \to R/I$ to each coefficient. This is a ring homomorphism, by formals for addition and multiplication in polynomial rings, and the fact that $\pi$ is a homomorphism. This is onto (because $\pi$ is onto). Its kernel is $I[x]$. $\therefore$ it gives an isomorphism $R[x]/(I) \xrightarrow{\sim} (R/I)[x]$ by the First Isomorphism Theorem.
c. $I$ is prime in $R$ $\implies$ $R/I$ is an integral domain \
$\implies$ $(R/I)[x]$ is an integral domain \
$\implies$ $R[x]/(I)$ is an integral domain \
$\implies$ $(I) is prime (in R[x])$
