# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-03-28
- Rings
- Matrix rings
- Polynomial rings

*For Wednesday*: \
Read Sect. 7.2

Homework due Friday:

- Sect. 6.3 (p. 221): 11, 14
- Sect. 7.1 (p. 231): 6, 11, 12, 28
- Sect. 7.2 (p. 238): 2, 9, 12

For 6.3.14: $G_p = \langle u, v | u^p = v^3 = 1, vu = u^av \rangle$. $a \in \mathbb{Z}$ is such that $\bar{a}$ has order 3 in $(\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$ \
For 7.2.9: Simplify your answers

**Definition**: Let $R$ be a ring with a 1.

a. Let $u \in R$. An *inverse* of $u$ is an element $r \in R$ such that $uv = vu = 1$ (two-sided inverse).
b. A *unit* in $R$ is an element that has an inverse (the inverse is unique because if $v'$ is another inverse, then $v' = 1v' = vuv' = v1 = v$).
c. The set of units in $R$ is written $R^{\times}$, and is a group under the multiplication operation of $R$.

**Examples**: $(\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$, $\mathbb{Z}^{\times} = \{\pm 1\}$, $\mathbb{Q}^{\times} = \mathbb{Q} \setminus \{0\}$, $\mathbb{R}^{\times} = \mathbb{R} \setminus \{0\}$, $\mathbb{C}^{\times} = \mathbb{C} \setminus \{0\}$, $M_n(\mathbb{R})^{\times} = GL_n(\mathbb{R})$

**Definition**: A *division ring* is a ring with $1 \neq 0$ such that every nonzero element is a unit. Example of a noncommutative division ring: the quaternions $= \{a + bi + cj + dk  a, b, c, d \in \mathbb{R}, i^2 = j^2 = k^2 = -1\}$, $ij = k$, $ji = -k$, etc. as in the definition of $Q_8$.

**Definition**: A *field* is a commutative division ring (this is equivalent to the def. on p. 34).

**Definition**: Let $R$ be a ring. A *zero divisor* in $R$ is an element $a \in R$ such that $a \neq 0$ and $ab = 0$ or $ba = 0$ for some $b \neq 0$ in $R$. \
**Example**: In $M_2(\mathbb{R})$ $\left( \begin{array}{cc} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 \end{array} \right)$ is a zero divisor, because $\left( \begin{array}{cc} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 \end{array} \right) \left( \begin{array}{cc} 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 \end{array} \right) = \left( \begin{array}{cc} 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 \end{array} \right)$.
Can an element of a ring be both a zero divisor and a unit? *No*. If $u$ is a unit with inverse $v$, and $ub = 0$, then $b = vub = 0$, so $b = 0$. Likewise $bu = 0 \implies b = b1 = buv = 0$, so $b = 0$. \
Can a nonzero element of a ring be *neither* a unit nor a zero divisor? Yes: $2 \in \mathbb{Z}$.

**Definition**: A ring is *entire* if:

i. it is commutative
ii. it has $1 \neq 0$, and
iii. it has no zero divisors

An entire ring is also called an *integral domain* (older terminology) (prefer adjectives to nouns).

**Examples**: $\mathbb{Z}, \mathbb{Q}, \mathbb{R}, \mathbb{C}$, or any field.

**Definition**: A *subring* of a ring $R$ is a subset $S$ of $R$ that is a ring under the addition and multiplication operations inherited from $R$. \
*Equivalently*: it's an additve subgroup of $R$ that is closed under multiplication \
*or* it's a nonempty subset of $R$ that is closed under subtraction and multiplication.

**Examples**:

1. $2\mathbb{Z} \subseteq \mathbb{Z} \subseteq \mathbb{Q} \subseteq \mathbb{R} \subseteq \mathbb{C}$
2. Let $R_1$ and $R_2$ be a rings. Then the *direct product* $R_1 \times R_2$ of $R_1$ and $R_2$ is the cartesian product $R_1 \times R_2$ (as a set) with component wise addition and multiplication. This is a ring. Then $R_2 \times \{0\}$ and $\{0\} \times R_2$ are subringsof $R_1 \times R_2$. If $R_1$ and $R_2$ have 1, then so do $R_1 \times R_2$, $R_1 \times \{0\}$, and $\{0\} \times R_2$.

But their identity element are not the same. \
The identity element of $R_1 \times R_2$ is $(1, 1)$ \
the identity element of $R_1 \times \{0\}$ is $(1, 0)$ \
the identity element of $\{0\} \times R_2$ is $(0, 1)$

**Proposition**: Let $F$ be a field. If $R$ is a subgring of $F$ that contains the unity element of $F$, then $R$ is entire. \
**Proof**: On your homework. \
There's also a converse: envery entire ring is isomorphic to a subring of a field containg its identity elemtent. *Later*.

**Note**: In an entire ring $R$, you can cancel multiplication by nonzero elements: if $x \in \mathbb{R}$ and $x \neq 0$, then $xa = xb \implies a = b$ \
**Proof**: $x(a - b) = 0 \implies a - b = 0$. \
**More generally**: In any ring, if $x$ is $\neq 0$ and not a zero divisor, then $xa = xb \implies a = b$ and $ax = bx \implies a = b$ (same proof(s)).

## Matrix rings
**Defininition**: Let $R$ be a ring and let $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{> 0}$. Then $M_n(R)$ is the set of $n \times n$ matrices with entries in $R$. It is a ring, under the usual addition and multiplication (the $(i, k)$ entry of $AB$ is $\sum\limits_{j = 1}^{n} a_{ij}b_{jk}$) operations on matrices. \
**Note**: If $R$ is not commutative, then the theory of determinants won't work.

If $R$ has 1 then so does $M_n(R)$. If $S$ is a subgring of $R$, then $M_n(S)$ is a subring of $M_n(R)$. \
**Example**: $M_n(2\mathbb{Z}) \subseteq M_n(\mathbb{Z}) \subseteq M_n(\mathbb{Q}) \subseteq \ldots$ \
**Note**: $M_n(\mathbb{Z})^{\times} = \{A \in M_n(\mathbb{Z}) : \det{A} \in \{\pm 1\}\}$.

- "$\supseteq$" us formula for $A^{-1}$ using minors
- "$\subseteq$" if $B$ is an inverse of $A$ then $(\det{B})(\det{A}) = 1$, so $\det{A} \in \{\pm 1\}$.

## Polynomial Rings
Let $R$ be a commutative ring with 1.
**Definition**: An *indeterminate* over $R$ is a variable that you're not saying what it is. \
So it satisfies no relation other than $x + a = a + x$, $xa = ax$ $\forall a \in R$ (it acts like a generator of a free group).

**Definition**: The ring $R[x]$ is the set of all polynomials in $x$ with coefficients in $R$. These look like $p(x) = \sum\limits_{i = 1}^{n} a_ix^i = a_nx^n + a_{n - 1}x^{n - 1} + \ldots + a_1x + a_0$ with $a_i \in R\ \forall i$. Such polynomials can be added an multiplied using the usual rules of polynomials. This forms a ring. We think of $R$ as a subring of $R[x]$: the constant polynomials. Also we think of $x$ as an element of $R[x]$: $x = 1x$. \
Other definitions (see book): degree of $p$, leading term, leading coefficient
