# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-02-29
- Cosets and Normal Subgroups
- Lagrange's THeorem

## Cosets and Normal Subgroups Continued
**Remark on cosets**: In additive notation cosets are written $a + H$ (or $H + a$) instead of $aH$ (or $Ha$). Of course, if you're using additive notation, then the group is abelian, so $a + H = H + a$. \
**Note also**: $m\mathbb{Z} = \{nm : n \in \mathbb{Z}\}$ is not a coset. It's a *subgroup*. Also $\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z}$ is just $\mathbb{Z}/N$ with $N = m\mathbb{Z}$.

**Proposition**: If $N \trianglelefteq G$, then the operation $\star$ on the set of left cosets of $N$ defined by $(uN) \star (vN) = (uv)N$ is well defined. \
**Proof** If $u'N = uN$ and $v'N = vN$, then $u' \in uN$ and $v' \in vN$, so $u'v' \in (uN)(vN) = u(Nv)N = u(vN)N = (uv)(NN) \subseteq (uv)N$, where $(uN)(vN)$ is defined as $\{xy : x \in uN, y \in vN\}$. $\therefore$ $(u'v')N = (uv)N$. \
*Note*: The converse was shown earlier. \

**Corollary**: If $N \trianglelefteq G$, then the set of (left) cosets of $N$ in $G$ is a group, and $\pi : G \to \text{(this group)}$ is a surjective homomorphism, whose kernel is $N$. Furthermore the group *is* $G/N$ (defined using $\pi$ ($\{X_u : u \in \text{image of $\pi$}\}, X_u = \pi^{-1}(u), X_uX_v = X_{uv}$)). \
**Proof**: $\star$ (on set of cosets) is associative because \
$(uN \star vN) \star wN = (uv)N \star wN = ((uv)w)N = (u(vw))N = \ldots = uN \star (vN \star wN)$. \
Similarly $1N$ is an identity element, and $u^{-1}N$ is an inverse of $uN$. $\therefore$ this set is a group. Call it $H$. Then $\pi : G \to H$ is a homomorphism by definition, and is onto by definition. \
Also, $u \in \ker{\pi} \iff uN = 1N = N \iff u \in N$, $\therefore$ $\ker{\pi} = N$. This group *is* $G/N$, because for all cosets $a = uN$, $g \in X_a \iff \pi(g) = a \iff gN = uN \iff g \in uN$, so $X_a = uN$. $\therefore$ the set of $H = \text{set of $G/N$} = \{X_a : a \in H\}$ and $\star$ is the same: if $a = uN$ and $b = vN$ \
$X_a \star_{\text{old}} X_b = X_{ab} = X_{(uN)(vN)} = X_{(uv)N} = (uv)N$ \
and $uN \star vN = (uv)N$. \
So from now on, for *any* subgroup $H$ isn $G$, define $G/H = \{aH : a \in G\} = \text{set of left cosets}$. If $H$ is normal, then $G/H$ is a group. \

**Definition**: $\pi$ (as above) is called the natural projection.

**Proposition**: Let $\phi : G \to H$ be a surjective homomorphism, and let $N = \ker{\phi}$. Then, $\forall a \in H\ldotp X_a = \phi^{-1}(a) = uN$ for some $u \in G$. \
**Proof**: $X_a \neq \emptyset$, so pick $a \in X_a$. \
Then $v \in X_a \iff \phi(v) = a = \phi(u) \iff \phi(u^{-1}v) \in N$, because $\phi(u^{-1}v) = \phi(u)^{-1}\phi(v) = a^{-1}a = 1$. \
$\therefore$ $X_a = uN$.

**Proposition**: A subgroup $N$ of a group $G$ is the kernel of some homomorphism from $G$ if and only iff $N \trianglelefteq G$. \
**Proof**:

- $\implies$: $\phi : G \to H$ be a homomorphism and let $N = \ker{\phi}$. Then, for all $g \in G$, $gNg^{-1} \subseteq N$ because $x \in gNg^{-1} \implies x = gng^{-1}$ for some $n \in N$, and $\therefore$ $\phi(x) = \phi(gng^{-1}) = \phi(g)\phi(n)\phi(g^{-1}) = \phi(g) \cdot 1 \cdot \phi(g)^{-1} = 1$. $\therefore$ $x \in N$. $\therefore$ $N \trianglelefteq G$.
- $\impliedby$: Suppose $N \trianglelefteq G$. Let $\pi : G \to G/N$ be the natural projection. Then $\pi$ is a homomorphism and $N = \ker{\pi}$.

This answers question (1): which subgroups are kernels of homomorphisms? \
(2) images of homomorphisms are $\cong G/N, N \trianglelefteq G$. \
(3) if $N = \ker{\phi}$ then the image of $\phi$ is $\cong G/N$.

## Lagrange's Theorem
This comes from: if $H \le G$ and $u \in G$, then $|uH| = |H|$, because the map $f: H \to uH$ given by $f(h) = uh$ is bijective (onto by definition and 1-1 by cancelation: $ux = uy \implies x = y$).

**Theorem** (Lagrange's Theorem): If $H$ is a subgroup of a finite group $G$, then $|H|$ divides $|G|$. \
**Proof**: Let $|G : H| = |G/H|$. THen $|G| = |G/H||H|$ because there are $|G/H|$ left cosets of $H$ in $G$, and each of them has $|H|$ elements, and each element of $G$ is in exactly one such coset. \
**Definition**: $|G/H|$ is written $|G : H|$ or $(G : H)$. This is called the *index* of $H$ in $G$.

**Remark**: The set of right cosets of $H$ in $G$ is written $H \backslash G$ : $\{Hu : u \in G\}$. Also $|H \backslash G| = |G/H|$ (Ex. 3.2.12).

**Corollary 1**: If $G$ is a finite group and $x \in G$, then $|x| divides $|G|$. \
**Proof**: $|x| = |\langle x \rangle|$, an $\langle x \rangle$ is a subgroup of $G$, so $|\langle x \rangle|$ divides $|G|$.

**Corollary 2**: If $G$ is a finite group and $n = |G|$, then $x^n = 1 \forall x \in G$. \
**Proof**: $x^{|x|} = 1$ and $|x|$ divides $n$, so $x^n = 1$.

**Corollary 3**:  If $G$ is a group of order $p$ with $p$ prime, then $G$ is cyclic, so $G \cong \mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z}$. \
**Proof**: Let $x \in G$, $x \neq 1$. Then $|x| > 1$ and $|x|$ divides $p$, so $|x| = p$, $\therefore$ $\langle x \rangle = G$ because they have the same (*finite*) number of elements, so $G$ is cyclic.

**Corollary 4**: Let $G$ be a group and $H$ a subgroup. If $|G : H| = p$ is prime, then there are no subgroups between $G$ and $H$ (other than $G$ and $H$ themselves). \
**Proof**: Let $K \le G$ such that $K \supseteq H$. By Ex. 3.2.11, $p = |G : H| = |G : K||K : H|$. So since $|G : H|$ is prime, $|G : K| = 1$ or $|K : H| = 1$, so $\therefore$ $K = G$ or $K = H$. \
*Note*: $|G : K| = 1 \implies \text{only one right coset of $K$ in $G$}$, so $uK = 1K = K \forall u \in G$. $\therefore$ $u \in K\ \forall u \in G$. $\therefore$ $K = G$ (because $K \subset eq G$).
