# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-03-16
- Finish Cayley's Theorem
- Direct products of groups
- Finitely generated abelian group (if time)

**Example 10** (p. 122)

1. Let $G$ be a group of order 6. Show that $G$ is *non-abelian* then it contains a non-normal subgroup of order 2. \
By Cauchy's theorem, $G$ contains elements $x$ and $w$ with $|x| = 2$ and $|w| = 3$. Assume (by way of contradiction) that $\langle x \rangle$ is normal. Then $w \langle x \rangle w^{-1} = \langle x \rangle$, so $\{w1w^{-1}, wxw^{-1}\} = \{1, x\} = \langle x \rangle$. Since $w1w^{-1} = ww^{-1} = 1$, we must have $wxw^{-1} = x$, so $wx = xw$. $\therefore$ $G$ is abelian ($\langle x, w \rangle = G$ because $\langle x \rangle \le \langle x, w \rangle$, so $|\langle w, x \rangle|$ is even, and $3 = |w||\langle x, w \rangle|$, so $\langle x, w \rangle$ is a multiple of $\lcm(2, 3) = 6$. $\therefore$ $\langle x, w \rangle = G$. All generators commute with each other, so $G$ is abelian, contradiction.) Contradictioni so $\langle x \rangle$ is not normal.
2. Use this to classify groups of order 6. Let $G$ be a group of order 6.
    - *Case 1*: $G$ is non-abelian. Let $H$ be a subgroup of $G$ of order 2 that is not normal. Then $G$ acts on $G/H$. Let $N$ be the kernel of this action. then $\bigcap\limits_{g \in G} gHg^{-1}$. Since $H$ is not normal, $\exists g \st gHg^{-1} \not\subseteq H$, $\therefore$ $H \not \subseteq g^{-1}Hg$, $N \not\subseteq H$. But $|H| = 2$, so $N$ must be the trivial subgroup. $\pi_H : G \to S_{G/H}$ is injective ($\ker{\pi} = N = 1$), so $G$ is isomorphic to a subgroup of $S_{G/H}$. But $|H| = 2$ and $|G| = 6$, so $|G/H| = 3$. So $S_{G/H}$ has 6 elements. So does 6, so $G \cong S_{G/H} \cong S_3$ ($|G/H| = 3$), so $G \cong S_3$.
    - *Case 2*: $G$ is abelian. By Cauchy's theorem, $G$ has elements $x$ and $w$ with $|x| = 2$ and $|w| = 3$. What is the order of $xw$? $xw \neq 1$ because $x \not\in \langle w \rangle$ ($|x| \nmid |\langle w \rangle|$). \
    $(xw)^2 = x^2w^2 = w^2 \neq 1$ ($|w| = 3$, not 2). \
    $(xw)^3 = x^3w^3 = x^3 = x \neq 1$ \
    So $|xw| \neq 1, 2, 3$ and $|xw| \mid |G| = 6$, so $|xw| = 6$. $\therefore$ $\langle xw \rangle$ is a subgroup of $G$, so $\langle xw \rangle = G$, G is cyclic, $\therefore$ $G \cong Z_6$. So, all group of order 6 are isomorphic to either $S_3$ or $Z_6$. \
**Corollary**: $S_3$ is the smallest non-abelian group. If $|G| = 1$ then $G$ is trivial, $\therefore$ abelian. If $|G| = 2, 3$ or $5$ then $G$ is cyclic, $\therefore$ abelian. If $|G| = 4$, then $G \cong Z_4$ or $V_4$ (Klein group) (homework problem). $\therefore$ $G$ is abelian.

## Direct Products
**Recall**: If $A$ and $B$ are groups, then $A \times B$ is a agroup, via the operation $(a_1, b_1)(a_2, b_2) = (a_1a_2, b_1b_2)$.

**Definition**: Let $G_1, \ldots, G_n$ be groups. Then the product $G = G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots \times G_n$ is the set of all ordered n-tuples $(g_1, \ldots, g_n)$ with $g_i \in G_i$\ \forall i$. Define an operation on $G$ by \
$(g_1, g_2, \ldots, g_n)(h_1, h_2, \ldots, h_n) = (g_1h_1, g_2h_2, \ldots, g_nh_n).$ \
This is a group (identity is $(1, 1, \ldots, 1)$ and $(g_1, \ldots, g_n)^{-1} = (g_1^{-1}, \ldots, g_n^{-1})$. \
Similarly, if $G_1, G_2, \ldots$ is an infinite sequence of groups, then $G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots$ is the set of all sequences $(g_1, g_2, g_3, \ldots) with $g_i \in G_i\ \forall i$, with a binary operation defined componentwise: $(g_1, g_2, \ldots)(h_1, h_2, \ldots) = $(g_1h_1, g_2h_2, \ldots)$. This too is a group.

**Definition**: Let $I$ be a set and let $G_i$ be a group $\forall i \in I$. Then $\prod\limits_{i \in S} G_i$ is the set of all functions $\alpha : I \to \bigcup\limits_{i \in I} G_i$ such that $\alpha(1) \in G_i\ \forall i \in I$ (= cartesian product), with binary operation $\alpha\beta = (i \mapsto \alpha(i)\beta(i))$. This too is a group. \
Less generally, if $G$ is a group and $n \in \mathbb{N}$, then $G^n$ is the cartesian product of $G$ with itself $n$ times. (Examples: $\mathbb{R}^n$ is the set $\mathbb{R}^n$, with componentwise addition, $G^0 = \text{trivial group}$.

**Proposition**: If $G = G_1 \times \ldots \times G_n$ then $|G|$ is $\prod\limits_{i = 1}^n |G_i|$ (or $\infty$ if and only if $|G_i| = \infty$ for some i).

**Proposition**: Let $G_1, \ldots, G_n$ be groups, and let $G = G_1 \times \ldots \times G_n$. Then: \
1. $\forall i = 1, 2, \ldots, n$, there is an injective homomorphism $\phi_i : G_i \to G$ given by $x \mapsto (1, 1, \ldots, 1, x, 1, \ldots, 1)$ with $x$ being at the $\nth{i}$ (extend by $I$). \
We think of the image of $\phi_i$ as the copy of $G_I$ sitting inside of $G$. (e.g. coordinate axes in $\mathbb{R}^n$.) With this identification, $G_i \trianglelefteq G$, and $G/G_i \cong G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots \times G_{i - 1} \times G_{i + 1} \times \ldots \times G_n$. (Proof: map $G$ to $G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots \times G_{i - 1} \times G_{i + 1} \times \ldots \times G_n$. It's onto and kernel $= G_i$). \
We also have projection homomorphisms $\pi_i : G \to G_i$: given by $(g_1, g_2, \ldots, g_n) \mapsto g_i$ $\forall i$. They are onto, $\forall i\ldotp \pi_i$ is called the $\nth{i}$ projection homomorphism.

3. If $H_1 \le G_i\ \forall i$ then we can regard $H_1 \times H_2 \times \ldots \times H_n$ as a subset of $G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots \times G_n$. It is a subgroup. It is normal $\iff H_i \trianglelefteq G_i\ \forall i$. Then $\ker{\pi_i} = G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots \times G_{i - 1} \times 1 \times G_{i + 1} \times \ldots \times G_n$ and $G_i$ (as a subgroup of $G$) is $1 \times 1 \times \ldots \times 1 \times G_i \times 1 \times \ldots \times 1$.\
**Also** If $x \in G_i$ and $y \in G_j$ with $i \neq j$, then $xy = yx$ (identifying $G_i$ and $G_j$ as in (1)). All of the above also works with infinite products $G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots$ and $\prod_\limits_{i \in I} G_i$. \
Let $G$ be a group and let $G_1, \ldots, G_n$ be subgroups of $G$. Then the statement "$G = G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots \times G_n$" means there is an isomoprhism $\phi : G \to G_1 \times G_2 \times \ldots \times G_n$ such that $\phi(g) = \phi_i(g)\ \forall i = 1, \ldots, n$ and $\forall g \in G_i$ (where $\phi_i$ is as in (1)).
