---
header-includes:
    - \newcommand\Omicron{O}
---
# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-03-07
- Even and odd permutations

$\exists$ a handout

**Theorem 1**: Let $n \ge 2$. Then there is a *unique* homomorphism $\epsilon : S_n \to \{\pm 1\}$ (under multiplication) such that $\epsilon((a, b)) = -1\ \forall \text{distinct}\ a, b \in \{1, 2, \ldots, n\}$. \
It is surjective. \
We'll do this differently from the book (see handout). \
For today, let $n \ge 2$ and let $A = \{1, 2, \ldots, n\}$. We'll use the action of $S_n$ on $A$ given by $\sigma \cdot a = \sigma(a)\ (\sigma \in S_n, a \in A)$. \
Ex. 18 in Sect. 17 (p. 45) says: \
Let a group $H$ act on a set $A$. Define a relation $\sim$ by $a \sim b$ if $a = h \cdot b$ for some $h \in H$.  Then $\sim$ is an equivalence relation. The equivalence class $\bar{a}$ of an element $a \in A$ is called the *orbit* of $a$ under the action of $H$.

**Definition**: Let $\sigma \in S_n$ and $a \in A$. Let $\sim$ be the above equivalence relation for the action of $H = \langle \sigma \rangle$ on $A$. Then the equivalence class $\bar{a}$ of $a$ is called the *orbit* of $a$ for $\sigma$.

**Proposition**: Let $\sigma \in S_n$ and $a \in A$. Let $d$ be the smallest positive integerfor which $\sigma^{d}(a) = a$. Then the elements $\sigma^{i}(a)$, $i = 0, 1, \ldots, d - 1$, are distinct, and the orbit of $a$ under $\sigma$ $\{a, \sigma(a), \sigma^{2}(a), \ldots, \sigma^{d - 1}(a)\}$. \
**Proof**: Let $d$ be as above (this exists because if $m = |\sigma|$ then $m < \infty$ and $\sigma^m = 1$, so $\sigma^m(a) = a$. In general, though, $d$ can be unequal to $|\sigma|$). The elements $\sigma^i(a)$, $i = 0, 1, \ldots, d - 1$ are distinct because if $\sigma^i(a) = \sigma^j(a)$ for some $\Omicron \le i < j < d$, then (cancelling $\sigma^i$) $\sigma^{j - i}(a) = a$ with $0 < j - i < d$, contradicting the choice of $d$. Then $\Omicron = \{a, \sigma(a), \sigma^2(a) \ldots, \sigma^{d - 1}(a)\}$; the orbit ecause:

i. $\Omicron \in \text{the orbit}$ (clear, since $1, \sigma, \sigma^2m \ldots, \sigma^{d - 1} \in \langle \sigma \rangle$).
ii. if $b \in \text{the orbit}$ then $b = \tau(a)$ with $\tau \in \langle \sigma \rangle$.

Write $\tau = \sigma^i$ for some $i \in \mathbb{Z}$. \
Write $i = qd + j$ with $q, j \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $0 \le j < d$. \
Then $b = \sigma^i(a) = \sigma^{qd + j}(a) = \sigma^j(\sigma^{qd}(a)) = a = \sigma^j(a) \in \Omicron$. \
$\therefore$ the orbit $\subseteq \Omicron$, so they're equal.

**Corollary**: Let $\sigma, a, d$ be as above, and let $\tau = (a\ \sigma(a)\ \sigma^2(a)\ \ldots\ \sigma^{d - 1}(a))$. \
Then $\tau(b) = \sigma(b)\ \forall b \in \Omicron$ and $\tau(b) = b\ \forall(b) \not\in \Omicron$.

**Example**: $\sigma = (1\ 2\ 3)(4\ 6)(5\ 7) \in S_8$. \
Orbits are $\{1, 2, 3\}, \{4, 6\}, \{5, 7\}, \{8\}$.

**Theorem 2**: Every permutation in $S_n$ can be written as a product of disjoint cycles. Such a representation is unique up to:

1. adding or removing 1-cycles,
2. permuting the disjoint cycles (which all commute with each other), and
3. choosing a different starting point for (some of) the cycles.

**Proof**: **Existence**: Given $\sigma \in S_n$, choose one element in each orbit of $\sigma$, and multiply the cycles as in the corollary for all such elements. The cycles are disjoint because the orbits are disjoint. Their product is $\sigma$ because $\forall a \in A$, only on eof the cycles affects a or $\sigma(a)$, and that cycle maps $a$ to $\sigma(a)$. \
**Uniqueness**: Suppose $\sigma = \tau_1, \tau_2, \ldots, \tau_k$ where $\tau_1, \ldots, \tau_k$ are disjoint cycles. Include extra 1-cycles so that each element of $A$ occurs in exactly one of the cycles of $\tau$. Then you have an equivalence relation $\sim$ on $A$ given by $a \sim b$ if they occur in the same cycle $\tau_i$. This is the same equivalence relation as the one giving the orbits of $\sigma$. Then each $\tau_i$ is as in the corollary; if you choose a different "$a$", you just end starting the cycle at a different point.

Now we can prove Thm. 1 (about existence and uniqueness of $\epsilon : S_n \to \{\pm 1\}$). \
**Definition**: A *transposition* is a 2-cycle. \
**Proposition**: Every element of $S_n$ can be written as a product of transpositions (not uniquely). \
**Proof**: For any $d$-cycle, you have: $(a_1\ a_2\ \ldots\ a_d) = (a_1\ a_2)(a_2\ a_3) \ldots (a_1\ a_d)\ (\forall d \in \mathbb{Z}_{> 0})$. So a $d$-cycle is a product of $d - 1$ transpositions. \
For any $\sigma \in S_n$, write it as a product of (disjoint) cycles and apply the above to each cycle. \
So if $\sigma = \tau_i\ \tau_2\ \ldots \tau_k$, where $\tau_1, \ldots, \tau_k$ are disjoint cycles and every element of $a$ occurs in some $\tau$: ($\therefore$ in exactly one $\tau_i$, how many transpositions do we get? \
Say $\tau_i$ has length $d_i$ for each $i$. Then the number of transpositions is: \
$\sum\limits_{i = 1}^k (d_i - 1) = (\sum\limits_{i = 1}^k d_i) - (\sum\limits_{i = 1}^k 1) = n - k$, \
where $k$ is the number of orbits of $\sigma$. \
If $\epsilon$ exists, then it has to equal $(-1)^{n - k}$ because it's a homomorphism, and $\epsilon$ of each transpositions is -1.

**Definition**: Define $\epsilon : S_n \to \{\pm 1\}$ by $\epsilon(\sigma) = (-1)^{n - k}$, where $k$ is the number of orbits of $\sigma$. This is well defined (but we need to prove it's a homomorphism).

**Lemma**: Let $a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_r, b_1, b_2, \ldots, b_s$ be distinct elements of $A$, with $r, s \in \mathbb{Z}_{> 0}$. Then:

a. $(a_1\ a_2\ \ldots\ a_r)(b_1\ b_2\ \ldots b_s)(a_r\ b_s) = (a_1\ a_2\ \ldots\ a_r\ b_1\ b_2\ ldots\ b_s)$ and
a. $(a_1\ a_2\ \ldots\ a_r\ b_1\ b_2\ \ldots b_s)(a_r\ b_s) = (a_1\ a_2\ \ldots\ a_r)(b_1\ b_2\ ldots\ b_s)$

**Proof**:

a. Compute both sides and see that they're equal (see handout).
b. Multiply both sides of (a) on the right by (a_r\ b_s).

**Corollary**: Multiplying an element of $S_n$ by a transposition changes its number of orbits by $\pm 1$.

**Proposition**: If $\sigma \in S_n$ can be written as a product of $m$ transpositions, then $\epsilon(\sigma) = (-1)^m$. \
**Proof**: We showed that if $\rho, \tau \in S_n$ and $\tau$ is a transposition then $\epsilon(\rho\tau) = -\epsilon(\rho)$. Also $\epsilon(1) = 1$ (because 1 has $n$ orbits). \
Apply this $m$ times, starting with $\epsilon(1) = 1$ to get $\epsilon(\sigma) = (-1)^m$.

*Then* $\epsilon(\tau) = -1\ \forall\ \text{transpositions}\ \tau$ (take $m = 1$), and $\epsilon$ is a homomorphism (if $\sigma$ is a product of $m$ transpositions and $\rho$ is a product of $k$ transpositions then $\sigma\rho$ is a product of $m + k$ transpositions and $\therefore$ $\epsilon(\sigma\rho) = (-1)^{m + k} = (-1)^m(-1)^k = \epsilon(\sigma)\epsilon(\rho)$. So $\epsilon$ exists. \
And $\epsilon$ is unique because we said what it has to be.
