# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-02-03

- Finish presentation of groups
- Symmetric groups
- Matrix groups
- Quaternionic group (time permitting)

Given a group presentation $\langle S | R_1, \ldots, R_m \rangle$, to find out what group $G$ it describes:

1. Find a list of expressions in the generators (elements of $S$) that should cover all elements of the group
2. Find an explicit group $G'$ such that
    a. the relations are all true in $G'$, and
    b. each expression in the list from Step 1 is a different element of $G'$ (this is not easy).

We did this for $\langle \{r, s\} | r^n = 1, s^2 = 1, sr = r^{-1}s \rangle$. \
*A trickier example*: \
What is $\langle \{x, y\} | x^5 = 1, y^3 = 1, yx = x^3y \rangle$? \
You expect the group to have 15 elements: $x^iy^j : i = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4; j = 0, 1, 2$.
In fact, these expressions cover all the elements of the group, but there are redundancies. \
$yx^2 = (yx)x = x^3yx = x^3 \times x^3y = x^6y = xy$ \
Similarly by induction, $yx^i = x^{3i}y$ for all $i = 1, 2, 3, \ldots$ \
Then $y^2x^i = y \times yx^i = y \times x^{3i}y = x^{9i}y^2$ \
and then $y^3x = y \times y^2x = y \times x^9y^2 = x^{27}y^3$ \
But $y^3 = 1$, so $x = x^{27}$; $x^{26} = 1$. \
But also $x^{25} = (x^5)^5 = 1^5 = 1$, so \
$1 = x^{26} = x \times x^{25} = x \times 1 = x$ \
So $x = 1$, and therefore the group is actually $\langle \{y\} | y^3 = 1 \rangle$. \
This group has 3 elements: $1, y, y^2$.

## Symmetric Groups
**Definition**: Let $\Omega$ be a set (allow $\Omega \neq \emptyset$, but don't worry too much about that case). Then the *symmetric group on $\Omega$* is the group $S_{\Omega}$, whose elements are all of the bijections from $\Omega$ to $\Omega$, and whose group operation is composition of functions. Note: if $f, g \in S_{\Omega}$, then $f \circ g \in S_{\Omega}$ because $f \circ g$ maps $\Omega$ to $\Omega$, and is bijective. $f \circ g$ is injective: $x \neq y \implies g(x) \neq g(y) \implies f(g(x)) \neq f(g(y)) \ \forall x, y \in \Omega$ : $f \circ g$ is 1-1. \
$\forall z \in \Omega\ldotp \exists y \in \Omega \text{ s.t. } g(y) = z$ (since $g$ is surjective) and $\exists x \in \Omega \text{ s.t. } f(x) = y$ (since f is surjective). $\therefore$ $(f \circ g)(x) = f(g(x)) = f(y) = z$ so $f \circ g$ is surjective. \
Therefore $f \circ g \in S_{\Omega} \ \forall f, g \in S_{\Omega}$. \
Also, composition is associative. \
The *identity map*, $i : \Omega \to \Omega$, given by $i(x) = x \ \forall x \in \Omega$ is the group identity, and for all $f \in S_{\Omega}$, the inverse function $f^{-1}$ is the inverse in the group. $\therefore$ $S_{\Omega}$ is a group.

**Definition**: Let $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{> 0}$ (or $n \in \mathbb{N}$). Then the *symmetric group on n letters* is the group $S_n = S_{\{1, 2, \ldots, n\}}$.

**Examples**:

0. $S_0 = S_{\emptyset}$ is the trivial group (there is only one function $f : \emptyset \to \emptyset$).
1. $S_1$ is also the trivial group. There is only one function $f : \{1\} \to \{1\}$.
2. $S_2 = S_{\{1, 2\}}$ has two elements: \
$f$ = identity function: $f(1) = 1, f(2) = 2$\
$g$ = function that switches 1 and 2: $g(1) = 2, g(2) = 1$.

| $(\circ)$ | $f$ | $g$ |
|-----------|-----|-----|
| $f$       | $f$ | $g$ |
| $g$       | $g$ | $f$ |

Looks a lot like $\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$:

| $(+)$     | $\bar{0}$ | $\bar{1}$ |
|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| $\bar{0}$ | $\bar{0}$ | $\bar{1}$ |
| $\bar{1}$ | $\bar{1}$ | $\bar{0}$ |

In general, $S_n$ has $n!$ elements $\forall n \in \mathbb{Z}_{> 0}$ (or $n \in \mathbb{N}$, note that $0! = 1$). \
To choose $\sigma \in S_n$: \
You have $n$ possibile choices for $\sigma(1)$ \
You have $n - 1$ possible choices for $\sigma(2)$ \
You have $n - 2$ possible choices for $\sigma(3)$ \
You have $1$ possible choices for $\sigma(n)$

## Cycles
**Definition**: The notation ($a_1\ a_2\ \ldots\ a_m$), where $m \in \mathbb{Z}_{> 0}$ and $a_1, \ldots, a_m$ are *distinct* elements of $\{1, 2, \ldots, n\}$, is the element $\sigma \in S_n$ defined by: \
$\sigma(a_i) = a_{i + 1}$, $i = 1, \ldots, m - 1$ \
$\sigma(a_m) = a_1$ \
and $\sigma(x) = x \ \forall x \in \{1, 2, \ldots, n\} \setminus \{a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_m\}$. This is called a *cycle*, or an *m-cycle*, and its *length* is $m$.

**Definition**: Cycles ($a_1\ a_2\ \ldots\ a_m$) and ($b_1\ b_2\ \ldots\ b_k$), are *disjoint* if the sets $\{a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_m\}$ and $\{b_1, b_2, \ldots, b_k\}$ are disjoint. \
**Key Fact**: Disjoint cycles commute. \
**Proof**: \
$(a_1\ a_2\ \ldots\ a_m)(b_1\ b_2\ \ldots\ b_k) = (b_1\ b_2\ \ldots\ b_k)(a_1\ a_2\ \ldots\ a_m)$ \
because both sides take:

- $a_i$ to $a_{i + 1}$ ($1 \le i < m$)
- $a_m$ to $a_1$
- $b_j$ to $b_{j + 1}$ ($1 \le j < k$)
- $b_k$ to $b_1$
- and leave all other elements of $\{1, 2, \ldots, n\}$ unchanged. 

**Theorem**: Every element of $S_n$ can be written as a (finite) product of (pairwise) disjoint cycles. \
**Proof**: Here's how (let $\sigma \in S_n$):

0. Start with the empty product
1. If all elements of $\{1, 2, \ldots, n\}$ are already mentioned in the pairwise product so far, stop.
2. Otherwise, find the smallest $a \in \{1, 2, \ldots, n\}$ not mentioned so far, and compute $\sigma(a)$, $\sigma^{2}(a), \ldots$ until you get $\sigma^{m}(a) = a$ the first time. Then, add the cycle $(a\ \sigma(a)\ \sigma^{2}(a)\ \ldots\ \sigma^{m}(a))$ to the list. Go back to step 1.
3. Optional last step: cancel out all 1-cycles.
