---
header-includes:
    - \newcommand\st{\ \text{s.t.}\ }
    - \newcommand\im{\text{Im}}
---
# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-03-07
- The Alternating Group
- Group Actions
- Cayley's Theorem

## Last Time
**Theorem**: Let $n \ge 2$. Then there is a unique homomorphism $\epsilon : S_n \to \{\pm 1\}$$ such that $\epsilon(\tau) = -1$ for all transpositions of $\tau \in S_n$. It is surjective.

See pictures

## Group Actions
**Recall**: An action of a group $G$ on a set $A$ is a function $G \times A \to A$, denoted $(g, a) \mapsto g \cdot a$, such that:

1. $g_1 \cdot (g_2 \cdot a) = (g_1g_2) \cdot a\ \forall g_1, g_2 \in G; a \in A$, and
2. $1 \cdot a = a\ \forall a \in A$.

Giving an action of $G$ on $A$ is equivalent to giving a homomorphism $\phi : G \to S_A$, $g \mapsto (a \mapsto g \cdot a)$.
*New*: Such a map is called a *permutation representation* of $G$.

The *kernel* of a group action = $\{g \in G : g \cdot a = a\ \forall a \in A\} = \ker{\phi}$. \
The *stabilizer* of an element $a \in A$ is the subgroup \
$G_a = \{g \in G : g \cdot a = a\}$ \
(so the kernel of the action is $\bigcap\limits_{a \in A} G_a$). \
(*Note*: $G_a$ need not be normal.) \

**Definition**: An action of a group on a set is:

- *faithful* if its kernel is the trivial subgroup, and
- *transitive* if it has only one orbit ($\forall a, b \in A\ldotp \exists g \in G \st b = g \cdot a$)

**Proposition**: Let $G$ act on a set $A$, let $a \in A$, and let $O$ be the orbit of $a$ under the action of $G$. Then, for any $b \in O$, the set $\{g \in G : g \cdot a = b\}$ is a left coset of $G_a$ in $G$, and there is a natural well-defined bijection from the set $G/G_a$ (set of left cosets) to $O$, given by $gG_a \mapsto g \cdot a$. Therefore, $|O| = |G : G_a|$ (and $|O| = \infty \iff |G : G_a| = \infty$). \
**Proof**: Given $b \in O$ and $h \in G$ such that $b = h \cdot a$, we have $\{g \in G : g \cdot a = b\} = hG_a$ because \
$g \in hG_a \iff gG_a = hG_a \iff g^{-1}h \in G_a \iff g^{-1}h \cdot a = a \iff g^{-1}(h(a)) = a \iff g^{-1}(b) = a \iff g(a) = b \iff g \in \{g' \in G : g' \cdot a = b\}$. \
Then the above map is well defined $gG_a = hG_a \iff g(a) = h(a)$ (from the above). It's injective by the above. It's surjective by the definition of the orbit: $O \implies h \cdot a = b\ \text{for some}\ h \in G \implies hG_a \mapsto b$. \
The last sentence is immediate.

## Cayley's Theorem
Look at ghe multiplication table for $V_4$ (Klein group):

|     | $1$ | $a$ | $b$ | $c$ |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| $1$ | $1$ | $a$ | $b$ | $c$ |
| $a$ | $a$ | $1$ | $c$ | $b$ |
| $b$ | $b$ | $c$ | $1$ | $a$ |
| $c$ | $c$ | $b$ | $a$ | $1$ |

(Generally, in a multiplication table, the entry row $x$ and column $y$ is the product $xy$ (not $yx$)). \
Each row of the multiplication table contains every element of the group exactly once (not counting row labels). Similarly for columns. (by Prop. 2 on p. 20)

By (1) each $g \in G$ gives rise to a permutation of $G$ called $\sigma_g$: $\sigma_g(h) = gh$. \
So we get a *function* $\phi : G \to S_G$. \
By (2), this function is injective. In fact, $\phi$ is a homomorphism, because it is the permutation representation of $G$ associated to the action of $G$ on itself by left multiplication: $\sigma_g(h) = g \cdot h = gh$ \
Check that it's a group action:

1. $g_1 \cdot (g_2 \cdot a) = g_1(g_2a) = (g_1g_2)a = (g_1g_2) \cdot a\ \forall g_1, g_2, a \in G$, and
2. $1 \cdot a = a\ \forall a \in G$ because $1a = a$.

*This proves*:
**Theorem (Cayley)**: Every group is isomorphic to a subgroup of some permutation group. (In fact, one such isomorphism is given by the permutation representation of $G$ associated to the action of $G$ on itself by left multiplication.) So, if $G$ is a finite group and $n = |G|$, then one such representation is the isomorphism of $G$ with a subgroup of $S_n$. \
**Proof**: Let $\phi : G \to S_G$ be as in the parentesized sentence. Since $\phi$ is injective, it gives an isomorphism to $\im{\phi}$, which is a subgroup of $S_G$. \
**Example**: If $G = S_3$, then the map $G \to S_G$ gives an isomorphism of $S_3$ with a subgroup of $S_6$ (on homework: Ex. 4.2.2).

**More general theorem**: Let $G$ be a group, let $H$ be a subgroup of $G$, and let $A = G/H (= \text{set of left coset of $H$ in $G$})$. Let $G$ act on $A$ by $g \cdot (aH) = (ga)H$ for all $g, a \in G$ (this is well defined because $(ga)H = g(aH) = \{gx : x \in aH\}$). Let $\pi_H : G \to S_A = S_{G/H}$ be the associated permutation representation. Then:

1. $G$ acts transitively on $A$;
2. The stabilizer of $1H = H$ is $H$
3. $\ker{\pi_H} = \bigcap\limits_{x \in G} xHx^{-1}$. This is the largest normal subgroup of $G$ contained in $H$.

**Proof**:

1. Let $gH \in A$. Then $gH = g \cdot 1H$, so $gH$ is in the same orbit as $1H$, so there is only one orbit.
2. $x \cdot 1H = 1H \iff (x1)H = H \iff xH = H \iff x \in H$ so $x \in G_{1H} \iff x \in H$, so $G_{1H} = H$.
3. From your homework, $xHx^{-1} = xG_{1H}x^{-1} = G_{x \cdot 1H} = G_{xH}$: \
So $\bigcap\limits_{x \in G} xHx^{-1} = \bigcap\limits_{x \in G} G_{xH} = \bigcap_{a \in A} G_a = \ker{\pi_H}$. \
Second part: \
$\bigcap\limits_{x \in G} xHx^{-1}$ isnormal in $G$ (it's in $\ker{\pi_H}$), and $\subseteq H$. \
Let $N \trianglelefteq G$ with $N \subseteq H$. \
Then $N = gNg^{-1} \subseteq gHg^{-1}\ \forall g \in G$, $\therefore N \subseteq \bigcap\limits_{x \in G} xHx^{-1}$. 

When $H = 1$ you get back Cayley's theorem because $G$ bijective to $G/H$ by $\psi(g) = gH \in G/H \forall g \in g \in G$. and the actions correspond $x\psi(g) = \psi(xg)\ \forall g, x \in G$. \
So $\ker{\pi_H} = 1$ (subgroup of $H = 1$) \
so $\pi_H$ is injective.
