---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{tikz}
---

# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-02-19
- Subgroups of $S_3$
- Normalizers, centralizers, etc.
- Subgroups of cyclic groups

**Homework due 2016-02-26**:

- 2.1: 8, 14, 15
- 2.2: 6, 10
- 2.3: 2, 9, 11, 16
- 2.4: 3, 7, 15

## Subgroups of $S_3$
$S_3 = \{(1), (1\ 2), (1\ 3), (2\ 3), (1\ 2\ 3), (3\ 2\ 1)\}$ \
We've found the following subgroups so far: \
$\{(1)\}, \langle x \rangle, \langle y \rangle, \langle z \rangle, \langle w \rangle, S_3$ \
**Claim**: There are no other subgroups. \
Let $H < S_3$

- If $|H \cap \{x, y, z\}| = 3$ then $H = S_3$ (last time) \
- If $|H \cap \{x, y, z\}| = 2$ then if $x, y \in H$ then $z = xyx \in H$, contradiction. \
Similarly if $x, y \in H$ use $y = zxz$ \
"       " if $y, z \in H$ use $x = yzy$
- If $|H \cap \{x, y, z\}| = 1$ If $x \in H$ ($\implies H \supseteq \langle x \rangle = \{1, 2\}$) and $H \neq \langle x \rangle$ then $H$ must contain $w$ or $w^{-1}$ $\therefore$ $H \ni w$, so $y = wx \in H$, contradiction. \
Similarly if $y \in H$, get a contradiction using $z = wy$ \
"          " $z \in H$, "                       " $x = wz$
- If $|H \cap \{x, y, z\}| = 0$ then $H \subseteq \{(1), w, w^{-1}\}$ so either $H = \{(1)\}$ or $H$ contains $w$ or $w^{-1}$ ($H \ni w, \therefore H \supseteq \langle w \rangle$) \
$\therefore H = \langle w \rangle$

Diagram of subgroups of $S_3$:
\begin{tikzpicture}
  \node (s3) at (0,1) {$S_3$};
  \node (x)  at (-1.5,0) {$\langle x \rangle$};
  \node (y)  at (-0.5,0) {$\langle y \rangle$};
  \node (z)  at (0.5,0) {$\langle z \rangle$};
  \node (w)  at (1.5,0) {$\langle w \rangle$};
  \node (1)  at (0,-1) {$\{(1)\}$};
  \draw
    (s3) -- (x)
    (s3) -- (y)
    (s3) -- (z)
    (s3) -- (w)
    (x) -- (1)
    (y) -- (1)
    (z) -- (1)
    (w) -- (1);
\end{tikzpicture}
where the vertical or slanted lines are all of the inclusions.

**Note**: $\langle x \rangle \cup \langle y \rangle$ is not a subgroup of $S_3$ because $xy = (1\ 2)(1\ 3) = (1\ 3\ 2) = w^{-1}$ is not in $\langle x \rangle \cup \langle y \rangle$. So the union of some subgroups is usually *not* a subgroup. \
However, the intersection of subgroups is a subgroup. \
Let $\{H_i : i \in I\}$ be a nonempty collection of subgroups of a group $G$. Then $H = \bigcap\limits_{i \in I} H_i$ is a subgroup of $G$. \
**Proof**: $i \in H_i\ \forall i$, so $1 \in \bigcap\limits_{i \in I} H_i$; in particular, $H \neq \emptyset$ \
Also, if $x, y \in H$ then $x, y \in H_i \forall i$, $\therefore$ $xy^{-1} \in H_i\ \forall i$, $\therefore$ $xy^{-1} \in \bigcap\limits_{i \in I} H_i = H$. Therefore $H \le G$.

## Centralizers and Normalizers
**Definition**: Let $G$ be a group and let $A$ be a *subset* of $G$. Then:

a. The *centralizer* of $A$ in $G$ is the set $C_G(A) = \{g \in G : gag^{-1} = a\ \forall a \in A\}$.
b. The *normalizer* of $A$ in $G$ is the set $N_G(A) = \{g \in G : gAg^{-1} = A\}$. Here $gAg^{-1} = \{gag^{-1} : a \in A\}$.

**Variations**: If $a \in G$, then we write $C_G(a) = C_G(\{a\}) = \{g \in G : gag^{-1} \in a\} = \{g \in G : g\ \text{commutes with}\ a\}$. $\therefore$ $C_G(A) = \bigcap\limits_{a \in A} C_G(a)$ (if $A \neq \emptyset$). \
Also, if $A = G$ then $C_G(G)$ is called the center of $G$, and is written $Z(G)$. \
All of these are subgroups of $G$. \
For any set $A \in G$, $C_G(A) \subseteq N_G(A)$. \
For example, $C_G(G) = Z(G)$ but $N_G(G) = G$. \
$Z(G) = G \iff G$ is abelian ($ghg^{-1} = a \iff h = g^{-1}ag$)

**Definition**: Let a group $G$ act on a set $S$. Then for $s \in S$, the stabilizer of $s$ in $G$ is $G_s = \{g \in G : g \cdot s = s\}$. This is a subgroup of $G$. \

**Examples**:

1. If we let $G$ act on itself by conjugation: \
   $g \cdot s = gsg^{-1}\ \forall s \in G = S, g \in G$ then $G_s = C_G(s)$.
2. If $G = S_3$ and $S = \{1, 2, 3\}$ with the usual action $\sigma \cdot a = \sigma(a)$ ($\sigma \in G, a \in S$), then $G_3 = \langle (1\ 2) \rangle$ \
3. Similarly if $G = S_4$ and $S = \{1, 2, 3, 4\}$, with $G$ acting on $S$ via $\sigma$, then $G_4 \cong S_3$ (via $\sigma \in G \mapsto \sigma|_{\{1, 2, 3\}} \in S_3$)

**Note also**: Let $H_1$ and $H_2$ be subgroups of $G$. Then $H_1 \le H_2 \iff H_1 \subseteq H_2$.
**Proof**:

- $\implies$ is part of the definition of a subgroup
- $\impliedby$ group operation on $H_1$ and $H_2$ are compatible since they both come from the operation on $G$: $H_1 \le G \implies H_1 \neq \emptyset$ and $xy^{-1} \in H_1\ \forall x, y \in H_1 \implies H_1 \le H_2$ (since $H_1 \subseteq H_2$).

## Subgroups of Cyclic Groups
**Definition**: A group (or subgroup) $H$ is *cyclic* if there is an element $x \in H$ such that $H = \langle x \rangle = \{x^n : n \in \mathbb{Z}\} = \text{image of $\mathbb{Z} \to H$ given by $n \mapsto x^n$}$. \
Such an element x is called a *cyclic generator* for $H$. \
($\langle x \rangle = \{nx : n \in \mathbb{Z}\}$ if $H$ is written additively) \
If $x$ is a cyclic generator for $H_1$ then so is $x^{-1}$ ($\{x^{n} : n \in \mathbb{Z}\} = \{(x^{-1})^m : m \in \mathbb{Z}\}$ (take $m = -n$)). \
We saw a week ago that: \
if $|x| = \infty$ then $\langle x \rangle \cong \mathbb{Z}$ \
if $|x| = m < \infty$ then $\langle x \rangle \cong \mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z}$ \
in either case, $|x| = |\langle x \rangle|$.

**Corollary**: Any two cyclic groups of the same order are isomorphic. \
**Proposition**: Any subgroup of $\mathbb{Z}$ is cyclic. If it's non-trivial, then it is generated by its smallest positive element. \
**Proof**: If $H = \{0\}$, then $H = \langle 0 \rangle$ is cyclic. \
to be continued$\ldots$
