# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-02-08
- Group Actions
- Subgroups

## Sample First Midterm
On the first question, if you answered $D_{2n} = \langle \{r, s\} : r^n = 1, s^2 = 1, rs = sr^{-1} \rangle$ you would only get partial credit (this isn't the definition).

## Group Actions Continued
$g_1 \cdot (g_2 \cdot a) = (g_1g_2) \cdot a$ \
$1 \cdot a = a$

More examples of group actions:

2. Let $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{> 0}$, $G = S_n$, and $A = \{1, 2, \ldots, n\}$. Then $\sigma \cdot a = \sigma(a)$ is a group action of $G$ on $A$. \
$\sigma_1 \cdot (\sigma_2 \cdot a) = \sigma_1(\sigma_2(a))$ \
$(\sigma_1\sigma_2)(a) = (\sigma_1 \circ \sigma_2)(a) = \sigma_1(\sigma_2(a))$ \
$1 \cdot a = 1(a) = a$ (where 1 is the identity map). \
This also works for $G = S_{\Omega}$ and $A = \Omega$, for any set $\Omega$.
3. Let $G$ be any group and A be any set. Then $g \cdot a = a$ $\forall a \in A, g \in G$ is a group action, called the trivial action.

**Lemma**: Let a group $G$ act on a set $A$. For all $g \in G$, define a function $\sigma_g : A \to A$ by $\sigma_g(a) = g \cdot a$. Then $\sigma_g$ is a bijection $\forall g \in G$. \
**Proof**: $\sigma_{g^{-1}} \circ \sigma_g$ maps $a$ to $g^{-1} \cdot (g \cdot a) = (g^{-1}g) \cdot a = 1 \cdot a = a$. So $sigma_{g^{-1}} \circ \sigma_g$ is the identity map on $A$. Therefore $\sigma_{g^{-1}}$ is a left inverse for $\sigma_g$. Similarly, $\sigma_g \circ \sigma_{g^{-1}}$ maps $a$ to $\sigma_g(\sigma_{g^{-1}}(a)) = g \cdot (g^{-1} \cdot a) = (gg^{-1}) \cdot a = 1 \cdot a = a$, so $\sigma_{g^{-1}}$ is also a right inverse of $\sigma_g$, $\therefore$ $\sigma_g$ is bijective. ($\therefore$ $\sigma_g$ is a permuation of $A$.)

**Proposition**: Giving an action of a group $G$ on a set $A$ is equivalent to giving a homomorphism $G \to S_A$. \
**Proof**:

1. Let $G$ act on $A$. Then, for each $g \in G$, $\sigma_g \in S_A$, so we get a function $\phi : G \to S_A$. This is a homomorphism, because $\phi(g_1g_2) = \sigma_{g_1g_2}$, which maps $a$ to $(g_1g_2) \cdot a$ and $\phi(g_1)\phi(g_2) = \sigma_{g_1} \circ \sigma_{g_2}$, which maps $a$ to $g_1 \cdot (g_2 \cdot a)$ this is true $\forall a \in A$, so $\phi(g_1g_2) = \phi(g_1)\phi(g_2)$.
2. Let $\phi : G \to S_A$ be a homomorphism. Define a group action of $G$ on $A$ by letting $\sigma_g = \phi(g)$, and then let $g \cdot a = \sigma_g(a) \in A$. Check that this is a group action. Since $\phi$ is a homomorphism, $\phi(g_1g_2) = \sigma_{g_1}{g_2} = \phi(g_1)\phi(g_2) = \sigma_{g_1}\sigma{g_2}$.

Then (1) is true because because $g_1 \cdot (g_2 \cdot a) = \sigma_{g_1}(\sigma_{g_2}(a)) = (\sigma_{g_1}\sigma_{g_2})(a) = \sigma_{g_1g_2}(a) = (g_1g_2) \cdot a$. Also (2) is true because $\phi(1_g)$ is the identity map on $A$, so $1 \cdot a = \sigma_1 \cdot a = (\text{identity map on $A$})(a) = a$. So, we have functions: $\{\text{actions of $G$ on $A$}\} \leftrightharpoons \{\text{homorphisms $G \to S_A$}\}$. Need to check that these are mutually inverse. (Composing the two maps reverses the steps in each case).

**Exercise 14**: If $G$ is a *non-abelian* group and $A = G$, then the operation $g \cdot a = ag$ does *not* satisfy the conditions for a group action. This is because $g_1 \cdot (g_2 \cdot a) = g_1 \cdot (ag_2) = (ag_2)g_2 = ag_2g_1$ but $(g_1g_2) \cdot a = ag_1g_2$. These are equal $\iff$ $g_2g_1 = g_1g_2$ (cancel $a$: recall $a \in G$).

So condition (1) for a group operation will not always be true, since $G$ is non-abelian.

**Exercise 15**: Let $G$ be any group, and let $A = G$. Show that $g \cdot a = ag^{-1}$ is a group action of $G$ on $A$.

1. $g_1 \cdot (g_2 \cdot a) = g_1 \cdot (ag_2^{-1}) = (ag_2^{-1})g_1^{-1} = ag_2^{-1}g_1^{-1}$ and $(g_1g_2) \cdot a = a(g_1g_2)^{-1} = a(g_2^{-1}g_1^{-1}$ which are always equal, so (1) is true.
2. $1 \cdot a = a1^{-1} = a1 = a$.

**Definition**: Let $G$ act on a set $A$. Then the *kernel* of the group action is the set $\{g \in G : g \cdot a = a \quad \forall a \in A\}$. Let $H$ be such a kernel. Then $1 \in H$ (by (2)). If $x, y \in H$ then $xy \in H$ because $(xy) \cdot a = x \cdot (y \cdot a) = x \cdot a = a \quad \forall a \in A$ and $x^{-1} \in H$ because $\sigma_x$ is the identity map on $A$ $\therefore$ $\sigma_x^{-1}$ is the identity map. But we showed $\sigma_x^{-1} = \sigma_{x^{-1}}$, so $\sigma_{x^{-1}}$ is the identity map, $\therefore$ $x^{-1} \in H$. Incidentally, the kernel is also equal to the set $\{g \in G : \sigma_g \text{ is the identity map on A}\} = \{g \in G : \phi(g) = 1\}$, where $\phi : G \to S_A$ is the homomorphism that corresponds to the group action.

In example (2). $G = S_A$ acts on $A$ by $\sigma \cdot a = \sigma(a)$ the kernel is the trivial subgroup ($\sigma \cdot a = a \quad \forall a \in A \implies \phi = \text{ identity}$). The map $\phi : G \to S_A = \phi : S_A \to S_A$ is also the identity map. \
In example (3) (the trivial action), $g \cdot a = a \quad \forall a, \forall g$. The kernel is all of $G$. The map $\phi : G \to S_A$ is the trivial homorphism (the constant function $\phi(g) = 1 \quad \forall g$).

**Definition**: A *subgroup* of a group $G$ is a subset of $H$ of $G$ which is:

i. nonempty
ii. closed under the group operation ($x, y \in H \implies xy \in H$)
iii. closed under inversion ($x \in H \implies x^{-1} \in H$)

The notation $H \le G$ means that $H$ is a subgroup of $G$, and $H < G$ means that $H \le G$ and $H \neq G$ (proper subgroup).

**Examples**:

1. $\mathbb{Z} < \mathbb{Q} < \mathbb{R} < \mathbb{C}$ (under addition). \
   $\mathbb{Q}^{*} < \mathbb{R}^{*} < \mathbb{C}^{*}$ (under multiplication)
2. The kernel of a group action is a subgroup (of the group that is doing the acting).
3. If $\phi : G \to G'$ is a homomorphism, then $\ker{\phi} = \{g \in G : \phi(g) = 1\}$ is a subgroup of $G$. This is called the *kernel* of $\phi$.
