# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-01-25
- Euclidean Algorithm
- Partitions and equivalence relations

### Proof of existence of gcd's
**Euclidean algorithm**: \
Let $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$ not both zero. \
Step 1: If $b = 0$, then the answer is $|a|$. \
Otherwise, let $r_0 = a$ and $r_1 = |b|$. \
Then, for $n = 1, 2, 3, \ldots$ write $r_{n - 1} = q_nr_n + r_{n + 1}$ with $q_n, r_{n + 1} \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $0 \le r_{n + 1} < r_n$. \
When you reach $r_{n + 1} = 0$, stop. The answer is $r_n$.

**Example**: compute $\gcd(2016, 98)$ where $r_0 = 2016, r_1 = 98$. \
$2016 = 20 \times 98 + 56$ \
$98 = 1 \times 56 + 42$ \
$56 = 1 \times 42 + 14$ \
$42 = 3 \times 14 + 0$\
Answer is 14.

### Proof that the Euclidean algorithm actually gives you the gcd
Facts about the gcd:

i. If $a$ and $b$ are not both zero, then $\gcd(a, b) = \gcd(b, a)$. (From the definition, the common divisors are the same).
ii. The gcd only depends on the set of common divisors.
iii. If $a \neq 0$ then $\gcd(a, 0) = |a|$ because $d$ is a common divisor iff $d \mid a$ ($d \mid 0$ always). So
    i. $d = |a|$ satisfies $d$ is a common divisor ($|a| \mid a$)
    ii. If $d'$ is a common divisor then $d' \mid a \therefore d' \mid |a| = d$
    iii. $|a| > 0$
iv. If $a$ and $b$ are not both zero, and if $q$ is any integer, then $\gcd(a, b) = \gcd(a - qb, b)$ \
    If $d$ is a common divisor of $a$ and $b$, say $dx = a$ and $dy = b$; then $d(x - qy) = dx - ady = a - qb$, so $d \mid (a - qb)$ and $\therefore$ $d$ is a common divisor of $a - qb$ and $b$. \
    Converse: $d \mid (a - qb)$ and $d \mid b \implies dz = a - qb$ and $dy = b$, $d(z + qy) = dz + qdy = a - qb + qb = a$, so $d \mid a$. \
    $\therefore$ $d$ is a common divisor of $a$ and $b$. \
    $\therefore$ the common divisors of $a$ and $b$ are the same as the common divisors of $a - qb$ and $b$. \
v. $\gcd(a, b) = \gcd(a, -b)$

Back to the Euclidean algorithm: \
If we end at Step 1 then the answer is correct by (iii). \
Otherwise, $r_n = \gcd(r_n, 0) = \gcd(r_n, r_{n + 1}) = \gcd(r_{n - 1}, r_n) = \ldots = \gcd(r_1, r_0) = \gcd(|b|, a) = \gcd(|b|, a) = \gcd(a, b)$ by (iv) and (i). Because $n \mid b \iff n \mid (-b)$, so $a$ and $b$ have the same common divisors as $a$ and $-b$.

**Proposition**: \
If $d = \gcd(a, b)$ then there are integers $x$ and $y$ such that $d = ax + by$ (*$d$ is a $\mathbb{Z}$-linear combination of $a$ and $b$*). \
**Proof**: \
If you end at Step 1, then $d = (\pm 1)a$. Otherwise, follow the steps in the Euclidean algorithm to get $x$ and $y$.

Back to the previous example: \
$r_2 = 56 = 1 \times 2016 - 20 \times 98$ \
$r_3 = 42 = 98 - 56 = 98 - (1 \times 2016 - 20 \times 98) = 21 \times 98 - 1 \times 2016$ \
$r_4 = 14 = 56 - 1 \times 42 = 1 \times 2016 - 20 \times 98 - 1(21 \times 98 - 1 \times 2016) = 2 \times 2016 - 41 \times 98$

**Remark**: \
You can also get gcds from the prime factorizations of $|a|$ and $|b|$. \
In our example: \
$2016 = 2^5 \times 3^2 \times 7$ \
$98 = 2^1 \times 3^0 \times 7^2$ \
$\gcd(2016, 98) = 2^1 \times 3^0 \times 7^1 = 14$ \
(take the smallest exponent for each prime).

## Equivalence Relations
**Definition**: \
A *relation* on a set $A$ is a subset of $A \times A$. \
If the subset is $R$, we may write $aRb$ to mean $(a, b) \in R$, more often we write $a \sim b$. \
**Example**: $\le$ (when $A = \mathbb{R}$) \
In that case $R = \{(a, b) \in \mathbb{R}^2 : a \le b\}$.

**Definition**: \
A relation $\sim$ on a set $A$ is

- *reflexive* if $a \sim a$ for all $a \in A$
- *symmetric* if $a \sim b \implies b \sim a$ for all $a, b \in A$
- *transitive* if $(a \sim b \land b \sim c) \implies a \sim c$ for all $a, b, c \in A$:w

**Definition**: \
An equivlance relation is a relation on a set that is reflexive, symmetric and transitive. \
**Example**: \
Let $f : A \to S$ be a function. Then the relation $\sim$ defined by $a \sim b$ iff $f(a) = f(b)$ is an equivalence relation on $A$. \
Also $=$ on any set is an equivalence reltation \
$\le$ on $\mathbb{R}$ is *not* an equivalence relation.

**Definition**: \
A *partition* of a set $A$ is a collection of $\{A_i : i \in I\}$ of nonempty subsets of $A$ such that:
i. $\cup A_i = A$, and
ii. $A_i \cap A_j = \emptyset$ for all $i, j \in I$ with $i \neq j$ \
**Example**: \
$\{\{1, 2, 3\}, \{4, 5\}, \{6\}\}$ is a partition of $\{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6\}$ \
If $f : A \to B$ is surjective (onto), then $\{f^{-1}(b) : b \in B\}$ is a partition of $A$.

Equivalence relations and partitions are related by: \
**Definition**: \
Let $\sim$ be an equivalence relation on a set $A$, and let $a \in A$. Then the equivalence class of $a$ is the subset $\bar{a} = \{b \in A : b \sim a\}$ of $A$.

**Proposition**: \
Equivalence relations on a set $A$ and partition of $A$ are related: \
$\{\text{equivalnce relations on $A$}\} \rightleftharpoons \{\text{partitions of $A$}\}$ \
bijective functions mutually inverse \
$\sim \mapsto \{\bar{a} : a \in A\}$. \
$p = \{A_i : i \in I\} \mapsto \text{$a \sim b$ if $a$ and $b$ lie in the same $A_i$}$
