---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{esvect}
---

# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-02-08

- Homomorphisms
- Isomorphisms
- Group actions (if time permits)

For question 12 on page 45: \
Assume $n \ge 6$. Also "pairs" means "unordered pairs".

**More Examples of (Group) Homomorphisms**:\

3. If $G$ and $H$ are *any* groups, the constant function $\phi : G \to H$, $\phi(g) = 1 \quad \forall g \in G$ is a homomorphism called the *trivial* homomorphism.
4. If $G$ is any group, the *identity map* $\phi : G \to G$, given by $\phi(g) = g$ is a homomorphism.
5. If $F$ is any field and $a \in F$, then $\phi : (F, +) \to (F, +)$ given by $\phi(x) = ax$ is a homomorphism (by the distributive law). \
$a(x + y) = ax + ay$ \
$\phi(x + y) = \phi(x) + \phi(y)$
6. If $V$ and $W$ are vector spaces over a field $F$, then $V$ and $W$ are abelian groups under addition, and any linear transformation $T : V \to W$ is a homomorphism of these groups: $T(\vv{v_1} + \vv{v_2}) = T(\vv{v_1}) + T(\vv{v_2})$.
7. If $A$ and $B$ are groups, then $p_1 : A \times B \to A$ and $p_2 : A \times B \to B$, given by $(a, b) \mapsto a$ and $(a, b) \mapsto b$, respectively are homomorphisms (called the *projection* maps).
8. If $A$ and $B$ are groups, then $i_1: A \to A \times B$ given by $a \mapsto (a, 1)$ and $i_2 : B \to A \times B$ given by $b \mapsto (1, b)$ are homomorphisms.
9. If $G$ is a group and $x \in G$, then $\phi : \mathbb{Z} \to G$ given by $n \mapsto x^n$, is a homomorphism.

**Proposition**: Let $\phi : G \to H$ be a group homomorphism. \
Then:

a. $\phi(1_G) = 1_H$ ($1_G$ and $1_H$ are the identity elements in $G$ and $H$ respectively)
b. $\phi(x^{-1}) = \phi(x)^{-1} \quad \forall x \in G$ (inverse in $H$)
c. $\phi(x^n) = \phi(x)^n \quad \forall x \in G, n \in \mathbb{Z}$
d. $|\phi(x)| divides |x| \quad \forall x \in G$ for which $|x| < \infty$

**Proof**: \

a. $\phi(1_G) = \phi(1_G \times 1_G) = \phi(1_G)\phi(1_G)$ now cancel $\phi(1_G)$ to get (a)
b. $\phi(x)\phi(x^{-1}) = \phi(xx^{-1}) = \phi(1_G) = 1_H$, so $\phi(x^{-1})$ is the inverse of $\phi(x)$ in $H$
c. Consider the following cases:
    - $n = 0$ is (a)
    - $n > 0$ is by induction on n: \
      $\phi(x^{n + 1}) = \phi(x^n \times x) = \phi(x^n)\phi(x) = \phi(x)^n\phi(x) = \phi(x)^{n + 1}$ (n = 1 case is trivial).
    - $n < 0$ is by the $n > 0$ case and (b): \
      $\phi(x^n) = \phi((x^{-1})^{-n}) = \phi(x^{-1})^{-n} = (\phi(x)^{-1})^{-n} = \phi(x)^n$
d. Let $n = |x|$ (not always equal, see homework). Then $\phi(x)^n = \phi(x^n) = \phi(1_G) = 1_H$, so $n$ is a multiple of $|\phi(x)|$.

**Proposition**: If $\phi : G \to H$ and $\psi : H \to N$ are homomorphisms, then so is $\psi \circ \phi : G \to N$. \
**Proof**: $(\psi \circ \phi)(xy) = \psi(\phi(xy)) = \psi(\phi(x)\phi(y)) = \psi(\phi(x))\psi(\phi(y)) = ((\psi \circ \phi)(x))((\psi \circ \phi)(y))$

## Isomorphisms

**Definition**: Let $G$ and $H$ be groups. An *isomorphism* $\phi$ from $G$ to $H$ is a homomorphism $\phi : G \to H$ that is also bijective. *Idea*: $G$ and $H$ are "the same" group. \
**Theorem**: Let $S$ be a s set of groups. Define a relation $\sim$ on S by $G \sim H$ if there is an isomorphism from $G$ to $H$. Then $\sim$ is an equivalence relation on $S$. \
**Proof**:

- *Reflexivity*: $G \sim G \quad \forall G \in S$ because the identity map from $G$ to $G$ is an isomorphism
- *Symmetry*: Assume $G \sim H$. Let $\phi : G \to H$ be an isomorphism. Since $\phi$ is bijective, it has an inverse $\phi^{-1} : H \to G$, characterized by $\phi \circ \phi^{-1} = \text{ identity on $H$}$, and $\phi^{-1} \circ \phi = \text{ identity on G}$. \
Need to check that $\phi^{-1}$ is a homomorphism. \
Let $a', b' \in H$. Let $a = \phi^{-1}(a')$, $b = \phi^{-1}(b')$, $c = ab$, and $c' = \phi(ab) = \phi(a)\phi(b) = a'b'$. \
Then $\phi^{-1}(a'b') = \phi^{-1}(c') = \phi^{-1}(\phi(ab)) = ab = \phi^{-1}(a')\phi^{-1}(b')$. \
$\therefore$ $\phi^{-1}$ is a homomorphism, so $H \sim G$
- *Transitivity*: Assume $G \sim H$ and $H \sim K$. Then there are isomorphisms $\phi : G \to H$ and $\psi : H \to K$. Therefore $\psi \circ \phi : G \to K$ is an isomorphism because its a homomorphism, and it's bijective. $\therefore$ $G \sim K$.

**Definition**: Groups $G$ and $H$ are *isomorphic* if there's an isomorphism from $G$ to $H$ (or equivalently from $H$ to $G$). This is written $G \cong H$ or $ G \rightarrow{\sim} H$ (fi we're talking about the isomorphism)$.

**Examples**:

1. $S_2 \cong \mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$. \
$(1) \mapsto \bar{0}$ \
$(1 2) \mapsto \bar{1}$ \

| | (1) | (1 2) |
| (1) | (1) | (1 2) |
| (1 2) | (1) |

| | \bar{0} | \bar{1} |
| \bar{0} | \bar{0} | \bar{1} |
| \bar{1} | \bar{1} | \bar{0} |
2. $S_3 \not\cong \mathbb{Z}/5\mathbb{Z}$. ($S_3$ has 6 elements, while $\mathbb{Z}/5\mathbb{Z}$ has 5 elements) so the sets can't be bijective. Any two isomorphic groups have the same number of elements.
3. $S_3 \not\cong \mathbb{Z}/6\mathbb{Z}$ ($S_3$ is non-abelian, $\mathbb{Z}/6\mathbb{Z}$ is abelian). \
If $\phi : S_3 \to \mathbb{Z}/6\mathbb{Z}$ is an isomorphism, then we should have $\phi((1 2)) + \phi((1 2 3)) \neq \phi((1 2 3)) + \phi((1 2))$ (in $\mathbb{Z}/6\mathbb{Z}$), because $(1 2)(1 2 3) \neq (1 2 3)(1 2)$ (in $S_3$), but we don't.
If $G \cong H$ and $G$ is abelian, then so is $H$. \
Any property of a group that can be stated without referring to specific elements (other than the identity) must be the same in isomorphic groups. \
$xy = yx \quad \forall x, y \in G$ abelian.

## Group Actions
**Definition**: An *action* of a group $G$ on a set $A$ is a function from $G \times A$ to $A$ written $(g, a) \mapsto g \cdot a$ (or just $ga$), such that:

1. $g_1 \cdot (g_2 \cdot a) = (g_1g_2) \cdot a \quad \forall g_1, g_2 \in G, a \in A$;
2. $1 \cdot a = a \quad \forall a \in A$

Also "$G$ acts on $A$" means there's a group action of $G$ on $A$.

**Examples**:

1. Let $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{> 0}$. Then $\GL_n(\mathbb{R})$ acts on $\mathbb{R}^n$ by $A \cdot \vv{x} = A\vv{x}$ (matrix multiplication). Check:
    1. $A \cdot (B \cdot \vv{x}) = A(B\vv{x})$ and $(AB) \cdot \vv{x} = (AB)\vv{x}$ and they're equal $\forall A, B \in \GL_n(\mathbb{R}) and \vv{x} \in \mathbb{R}^n$.
    2. $I_n \cdot \vv{x} = I_n\vv{x} = \vv{x} \quad \forall \vv{x} \in \mathbb{R}^n$. \

**Note** this also works for $n = 0$, and with $\mathbb{R}$ replaced throughout by any field $F$: \
$\GL_n(F) acts on $F^n$ the same way $\forall$ fields $F$ and $\forall n \in \mathbb{N}$.
