---
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{amsmath}
    - \usepackage{stmaryrd}
    - \usepackage{tikz}
    - \DeclareMathOperator{\Ima}{Im}
---
# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-03-02
- Finish normal subgroups
- Isomorphism theorems

**Note**: We'll *skip* Section 3.4

**Proof** of Ex. 3.2.11 (p. 96): \
Let $H \le K \le G$. Show that $|G : H| = |G : K||K : H|$. \
*Note*: that we can't assume that $G$ is finite. We also can't assume that $H$ or K$ is a normal subgroup of $G$.
We'll assume that $|G : H|$ is finite. \
Map $G/H$ to $G/K$ by $uH \mapsto uK$. \
This is well defined because $uH = vH \implies u^{-1}v \in H \implies u^{-1}v \in K \implies uK = vK$. \
It's onto (surjective) because $\forall u \in G\ldotp uK = f(uH)$ (where $f$ is the function we're definining). \
Since $K/H \le G/H$, $|K : H| < \infty$. \
Let $a_1H, \ldots, a_nH$ be the elements of $K/H$ (without repetition). Then $K = a_1H \cup a_2H \cup \ldots a_nH$, and these cosets are disjoint ($a_1, \ldots, a_n$ are called a set of *coset representatives* of $H$ in $K$). Then $\forall u \in G\ldotp uK = (ua_1)H \cup \ldots \cup (ua_n)H$, and again these cosets are disjoint. \
So the fibers of $f : G/H \to G/K$ have $n$ elements each ($vH \in f^{-1}(uK) \iff f(vH) = vK = uK \iff v \in uK \iff v \in ua_1H$) for some $i \iff vH = ua_iH$ for some $i = 1, \ldots, n$. \
$\therefore$ $|G : H| = n|G : K| = |G : K||K : H|$. \
($f$ sorts the elements of $G/H$ into piles of $n$ elements each, and the number of piles is $|G/K| = |G : K|$

### Back to Subgroups of $S_3$
\begin{tikzpicture}
  \node (s3) at (0,1) {$S_3$};
  \node (x)  at (-1.5,0) {$\langle x \rangle$};
  \node (y)  at (-0.5,0) {$\langle y \rangle$};
  \node (z)  at (0.5,0) {$\langle z \rangle$};
  \node (w)  at (1.5,0) {$\langle w \rangle$};
  \node (1)  at (0,-1) {$\{(1)\}$};
  \draw
    (s3) -- (x) -- (1)
    (s3) -- (y) -- (1)
    (s3) -- (z) -- (1)
    (s3) -- (w) -- (1);
\end{tikzpicture}

We spent a lot of time showing that there were no subgroups between $\langle x \rangle, \langle y \rangle, \langle z \rangle, \langle w \rangle$ and $S_3$. This is now immediate, because $|S_3 : \langle x \rangle| = |S_3 : \langle y \rangle| = |S_3 : \langle z \rangle| = 3$ and $|S_3 : \langle w \rangle| = 2$ are all prime. Which subgroups of $S_3$ are normal in $S_3$? \
From earlier examples: \
$\{1\}$ and $S_3$ are normal (in $S_3$). \
$\langle x \rangle$ is not normal (in $S_3$). \
$\langle y \rangle, \langle z \rangle$ are also not normal (same reason as for $\langle x \rangle$). \
$\langle w \rangle$ is normal. This is because $|S_3 : \langle w \rangle| = 2$, and any subgroup of index 2 is normal. \
If $|G : H| = 2$ then the left cosets of $H$ are $H$ and the other one must be $G - H$. \
Likewise the right cosets are $H$ and $G - H$. \
$\therefore$ $gH = Hg$ because if $g \in H$ then $gH = Hg = H$ otherwise $gH = Hg$ because both $= G - H$.

Lagrange's theorem: if $H \le G$ and $|G| = n$ is finite, then $|H|$ divides $n$. You don't necessarily have a subgroup of every order dividing $n$. \
However you do have: \
**Theorem** (Cauchy): If $G$ is a finite group and $p$ is a prime divisor of $|G|$, then $G$ contains an element of order $p$ ($\therefore$ it has a subgroup of order $p$: $\langle x \rangle$ where $|x| = p$). \
**Proof**: On you homework.

**Proposition**: If $H$ and $K$ are finite subgroups of a group $G$, then $|HK| = \frac{|HK|}{|H \cap K|}$. \
**Proof**: *See book*, but it's the same idea as Ex. 3.2.11: map $H$ to $HK/K$. The fibers have $|H \cap K|$ elements each. \
**Note**: $|HK|$ might not be a subgroup of $G$ ($|HK|$ is defined as $\{hk : h \in H, k \in K\}$, $HK/K = \{uK : u \in HK\}$).

**Prop**: Let $H$ and $K$ be subgroups of a group $G$. Then $|HK| \le G \iff HK = KH$. \
**Proof** (sketch): If $HK \le G$, then $\forall x \in HK$, $x^{-1} \in HK$, so $x^{-1} = hk$ with $h \in H, k \in K$. \
$\therefore$ $x = k^{-1}h^{-1}$ lies in $KH$. \
$\therefore$ $HK \subseteq KH$. \
$KH \subseteq HK$, let $x \in KH$; $x = kh\ k \in K, h \in H$. \
Then $x^{-1} = h^{-1}k^{-1}$ lies in $HK$, so $x \in HK$ since $HK \le G$. \
$\therefore$ $KH \subseteq HK$. This proves "$\implies$". \
"$\impliedby$": Clearly $HK \neq \emptyset$, \
Let $a, b \in HK$. Then $a = h_1k_2$ and $b = h_2k_2$ $h_1, h_2 \in H; k_1, k_2 \in K$. \
Then $ab^{-1} = h_1k_1k_2^{-1}h_2^{-1}$ \
$k_1k_2^{-1}h_2^{-1} \in KH$, $\therefore$ it's in $HK$, so it equals $h_3k_3$ ($h_3 \in H, k_3 \in K$) \
$\therefore$ $ab^{-1} = h_1h_3k_3$ lies in $HK$. \
$\therefore$ $HK$ is a subgroup.

**Corollary**: If $H \le N_G(K)$ then $HK$ is a subgroup. In particular, if $K \trianglelefteq G$ then $HK \le G$. \
**Proof**: $HK = \bigcup\limits_{h \in H} hK = \bigcup\limits_{h \in H} Kh = KH$.

## Isomorphism Theorems
**Theorem** (1st isomorphism theorem): Let $\phi : G \to H$ be a homomorphism. Then $\ker{\phi}$ is a normal subgroup of $G$, and $\Ima{\phi} \cong G/\ker{\phi}$ (via $\phi(u) \mapsfrom u(\ker{\phi})$) \
**Proof**: This was done in Sect. 3.1

**Corollary 1**: $\phi : G \to H$ is injective $\iff$ $\ker{\phi} = 1$. \
**Proof**: If $\ker{\phi} = 1$ then fibers of $\phi$ all are cosets of $\ker{\phi}$ (or $\emptyset$), $\therefore$ they have $|\ker{\phi}| = 1$ element each (or 0), so $\phi$ is injective. \
If $\ker{\phi} \neq 1$ then $\ker{\phi}$ has two distinct elements, and they map to $1 \in H$.

**Corollary**: $|G : \ker{\phi}| = |\Ima{\phi}|$ \
**Proof**: $|G : \ker{\phi}| = |G/(\ker{\phi})| = |\Ima{\phi}|$ (use isomorphism).

Anatomy of a homomorphism: let $\phi : G \to H$ be a homomorphism. \
$G \xrightarrow[\text{surjective}]{\pi} G/(\ker{\phi}) \xrightarrow{\sim} \Ima{\phi} \xrightarrow[\text{injective}]{} H$ \
$\Ima{\phi} \to H$ is the inclusion map $x \mapsto x$. It is a homomorphism.

**Theorem** (2nd isomorphism theorem, "diamond"): Let $A$ and $B$ be subgroups of $G$, and assume that $A \subseteq N_G(B)$ (for example, $B \trianglelefteq G$). Then $AB$ is a subgroup of $G$, $B \trianglelefteq AB$, $A \cap B \trianglelefteq A$, and $AB/B \cong A/(A \cap B)$ via $aB \mapsfrom a(A \cap B)$.
\begin{tikzpicture}
  \node (00) at (0,1) {$AB$};
  \node (10)  at (-0.5,0) {$A$};
  \node (11)  at (0.5,0) {$B$};
  \node (20)  at (0,-1) {$A \cap B$};
  \draw
    (00) -- (10) -- (20)
    (00) -- (11) -- (20);
\end{tikzpicture}
**Proof**: $AB \le G$ is proved already. \
$B \trianglelefteq AB$ because $N_{AB}(B) \supseteq B$ ($B \le AB$) \
$N_{AB}(B) \supseteq A$ by assumption ($N_{AB}(B) = N_G(B) \cap AB$) \
$\therefore$ $N_{AB}(B) = AB$ because "$\supseteq$" is proved above, "$\le$" is from the def. \
To be continued
