---
header-includes:
    - \newcommand\im{\text{im}}
---
# MATH H113: Honors Introduction to Abstract Algebra
## 2016-03-16
- More Rubik
- Free groups

For Friday: Read Sect. 7.1 \
Two Handouts

## Rubik's Cubes (cont)
Number of Positions = $\frac{8! \times 3^8 \times 12! \times 12^{12}}{12}$ \
Parity of permutations of corner pieces = parityf of permutations of edge pieces (= $(-1)^{\text{number of permutations}}$). \
Twists of corner pieces \
Similar thing for twists (flips) of edge pieces.

# Free groups, generators, and relations. 
We'd like to define what group is $\langle (\text{generators}) | (\text{relations}) \rangle$. \
Start with no relations (just generators). \
**Proposition**: Let $\phi : G \to H$ be a homomorphism. If a set $S \subseteq G$ generates $G$, then $\phi(S)$ generates $\phi(G) = \im{\phi}$. \
**Proof**: $\im{\phi}$ is a subgroup and it contains $\phi(S)$, so $\langle \phi(s) \rangle \le \im{\phi}$. \
On the other hand, let $h \in \im{\phi}$. Then $h = \phi(g)$ for some $g \in G$, and we can write $g = s_1^{n_1} \cdots s_m^{n_m}$ with $m \in \mathbb{N}$, and $s_i \in S$, $n_i \in \mathbb{Z}\ \forall i$. \
Then $h = \phi(g) = \phi(s_1)^{n_1} \cdots \phi(s_m)^{n_m}$ lies in $\langle \phi(S) \rangle$. $\therefore$ $\im{phi} \subseteq \langle \phi(S) \rangle$. \
**Corollary**: Let $G$ be a grup, let $N \trianglelefteq G$, and let $\pi : G \to G/N$ be the natural projection. If $S$ generates $G$, then $\pi(S)$ generates $G/N = \im{\pi}$. \
**Corollary** (not needed today, but useful): Let $\phi_1, \phi_2 : G \to H$ be homomorphisms. If $S$ generates $G$ and $\phi_1(S) = \phi_2(S)\ \forall s \in S$, then $\phi_1 = \phi_2$. \
**Proof**: Exercise. \
*Back to the first corollary*: \
Going from $G$ to $G/N$, you have the same number of generators, but more relations. $\cdots \to G \to G/N$ (in order of fewer to more relations). \
*This motivates*: \
**Definition**: Let $S$ be a set. The *free group on $S$* (if it exists) is a group $G$, together with a function $i : S \to G$, that satisfies the following *universal property*: For all groups $G'$ and all functions $\phi : S \to G'$, there is a *unique* homomorphism $\Phi : G \to G'$ such that $\phi = \Phi \circ i$. \
See figure 1 \
(*Note*: I'm *not* requiring $i$ to be injective, I'm not requiring that $i(S)$ generate $G$ or that $\phi(S)$ generate $G'$. But I am requiring $\Phi$ to be unique.) \
*Note*: $G_2$ and $i_2 : S \to G_2$ satisfy $G \cong G_2$ (say $\psi : G \to G_2$ is a isomorphism) and $i_2 = \psi \circ i$, then $G_2$ and $i_2$ also satisfy the universal property. *Exercise*.

**Proposition**: If $G_1$ (with $i_1 : S \to G_1$) and $G_2$ (with $i_2 : S \to G_2$) both satisfy the universal property, then there is a unique isomorphism $\alpha : G_1 \to G_2$ such that $i_2 = \alpha \circ i_1$. \
See figure 2 \
**Proof**: $\exists$ unique homomorphism $\alpha : G_1 \to G_2$ such that $i_2 = \alpha \circ i_1$ and a unique $\beta : G_2 \to G_1$ s.t. $i_1 = \beta \circ i_2$. Not that both $\beta \circ \alpha = G_1 \to G_1$ and $\text{identity} : G_1 \to G_1$. $i_1 = (\beta \circ \alpha) \circ i_1$ and $i_1 = \text{identity} \circ i_1$, so $\beta \circ \alpha = \text{identity}$. Similarly $\alpha \circ \beta = \text{identity}$. $\therefore $\alpha$ is an isomorphism (with inverse $\beta$). \
See figure 3 \
Let $F(S)$ denote a free group on $S$ (if it exists). \
**Examples**:

1. $F(\emptyset) = \{1\}$, because for any group $G'$; there is only one homomorphism $\{1\} \to G$.
2. $F(\{x\}) = \mathbb{Z}$, with $i(x) = 1$ (or equivalently -1). \
**Proof**: Given a group $G$ and a choice of $\phi(x) \in G$, the only $\Phi : \mathbb{Z} \to G$ with $\Phi(1) = \phi(x)$ is $n \mapsto \phi(x)^n$. \

**Theorem**: Let $S$ be any set, then a free group $F(S)$ (with $i : S \to F(S)$) exist. \
**Proof**: Let $F(S)$ (as a set) be the set of all "reduced words", where

1. a word is a finite sequence $s_1^{\epsilon_1}, \ldots, \s_n^{\epsilon_n}$, with $n \in \mathbb{N}$, $s_i \in S\ \forall i$, and $\epsilon_i \in \{\pm 1\}\ \forall i$, and
2. a word $s_1^{\epsilon_1}, \ldots, s_n^{\epsilon_n}$ is reduced if there is no integer $i$ such that $0 \le i < n$, $s_i = s_{i + 1}$, and $\epsilon_i = -\epsilon_{i + 1}$ (in other words no cancellations are possible). \

Define a binary operation $\cdot$ on $F(S)$ by "concatenate and cancel": \
$(r_1^{\delta_1}, \ldots, r_m^{\delta_m}) \cdot (s_1^{\epsilon_1}, \ldots, s_n^{\epsilon_n}) = $(r_1^{\delta_1}, \ldots, r_{m - k}^{\delta_{m - k}}, s_{k + 1}^{\epsilon_{k + 1}}, \ldots, s_n^{\delta_n})$, where $k$ is the largest integer such that $k \le m$, $k \le n$, and ($r_{m - i} = s_{1 + i}$ and $\delta_{m - i} = -\epsilon{1 + i}$ for all $i$ with $0 \le i < k$). \
We want to prove that $F(S)$ is a group. (Recall Cayley's theorem). \
For each $s \in S$ and $\epsilon \in \{\pm 1\}$ define $\sigma_{s, \epsilon} : F(S) \to F(S)$ by $\sigma_s((s_1^{\epsilon_1}, \ldots, s_n^{\epsilon_n})) = \begin{cases} (s_2^{\epsilon_2}, \ldots, s_n^{\epsilon_n}$) & $n > 0$, $s_1 = s$, and $\epsilon_1 = -\epsilon$ \\ (s^{\epsilon}, s_1^{\epsilon_1}, \ldots, s_n^{\epsilon_n}) & otherwise \end{cases} = (s^{\epsilon}) \cdot (s_1^{\epsilon_1}, \ldots, s_n^{\epsilon_n})$. It's easy to check that $\sigma_{s, 1}(\sigma_{s, -1}(\alpha)) = \sigma_{s, -1}(\sigma_{s, 1}(\alpha)) = \alpha$. So $\forall s \in S\ldotp \sigma_{\s, \epsilon} \in S_{F(S)}$, and $\sigma_{s, \epsilon} = \sigma_{s, -\epsilon}^{-1}$. Let $\sigma_s = \sigma_{s, -1} = \sigma_{s}^{-1}$. Let $A(S)$ be the subgroup of $S_{F(S)}$ generated by $\{\sigma_s : s \in S\}$. \
Define $\phi : F(S) \to A(S)$ by $\phi((s_1^{\epsilon_1}, \ldots, s_n^{\epsilon_n})) = \sigma_{s_1}^{\epsilon_1} \circ \ldots \circ \sigma_{s_n}^{\epsilon_n}$. Then $\phi$ is onto, because you can write every $\gamma \in A(S)$ as a product $\sigma_{s_1}^{\epsilon_1} \circ \ldots \circ \sigma_{s_n}^{\epsilon_n}$ with no obvious cancellations ($s_i = s_{i + 1}, $\epsilon_i = -\epsilon_{i + 1}, 1 \le i < n$). Then $\gamma = \phi((s_1^{\epsilon_1}, \ldots, s_n^{\epsilon_n}))$. Also, $\phi$ is 1-1 because if $\alpha \in F(S)$, say $\alpha = s_1^{\epsilon_1}, \ldots, s_n^{\epsilon_n}$.
